/ an economy that works for everyone / protecting our environment / membership of the eu / our nhs and public services / education for all / our promise to young people / a place to call home / a safer world/ a citizens' democracy / a people's transport system our guarantee to you The Green Party has big, bold ideas to create a confident and caring Britain that we can all be proud of. We aren't afraid to hope for a better future or to be honest about how we get there. We believe in being brave, in speaking our minds, and in standing up for what matters. We are proud to do politics differently. Imagine a government that trusts in our common humanity and our capacity to govern ourselves. Imagine a government that believes that the best way forward is by working with each other, rather than against each other. Imagine a government that prioritises the rights of citizens and the environment over those of corporations. Imagine a government that gives everyone a chance and leaves nobody behind in a confident and caring This is what Green MPs promise to do for you and the people and places that you love. &bull; We will campaign for your right to vote on the final terms of the Brexit deal, including an option to stay in the EU. &bull; We will push for genuinely affordable, warm homes for everyone and a public health system free for all. &bull; We will fight for equality, and for a society where nobody is left behind. &bull; We will always act strongly on climate change and to protect the natural world we love. Britain. That's the kind of government we We will stand up for what matters. would work for. This is our Green Guarantee to you. <footer text="Green party manifesto /"> <page number=2> contents 4 / A green ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR EVERYONE 6 / PROTECTING OUR ENVIRONMENT 8 / MEMBERSHIP OF THE EU 10 / OUR NHS AND PUBLIC SERVICES 12 / EDUCATION FOR ALL 14 / OUR PROMISE TO YOUNG PEOPle 16 / A PLACE TO CALL HOME 18 / A SAFER WORLD 20 / A CITIZENS' DEMOCRACY 22 / A PEOPLE'S TRANSPORT sYSTEM A greenECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR EVERYONE The Green Party believes that our economy should be innovative, collaborative, forward facing and for the benefit of communities and the environment. The economy is all of us: our work, our creativity, what we buy, how we spend our time. It should allow us to lead happy and fulfilled lives. A Green economy would replace the exploitation of people and resources with decent, meaningful work. It would create over 1 million jobs through our programme of green investment and restoring the public sector. Our policies: &bull; Take steps towards the introduction of a universal basic income, including a government sponsored pilot scheme, as a means to increase security and avoid the poverty trap. &bull; Phase in a 4 day working week (a maximum of 35 hours) and abolish exploitative zero hours contracts. &bull; Reduce the gap between the highest and lowest paid, and increase the minimum wage to reach a genuine living wage of &pound;10 an hour by 2020. &bull; End the gender pay gap, and require a minimum 40% of all members of public company and public sector boards to be women. &bull; Use the government-owned Royal Bank of Scotland to create a network of local people's banks for every city and region, obliged to lend locally and provide cheap basic banking services. &bull; Ensure that everyone pays their fair share of tax and there is a crackdown on tax dodging. &bull; Reform taxation to include a wealth tax on the top 1% of earners, investing in more staff at HMRC so they can work more effectively, and reinstate the higher level of corporation tax for large businesses. &bull; A Robin Hood tax on high value transactions in the finance sector, and inheritance taxed according to the wealth of the recipient. &bull; A phased in abolition of the cap on employees' national insurance so that the wealthiest pay more. &bull; Support and promote small businesses, co-operatives and mutuals, and the roll out of high speed broadband. &bull; Support start-ups and creative enterprises through community credit and green investment, to provide opportunities for young people to be creative and innovative. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=5> PROTECTING OUR ENVIRONMENT You can trust the Green Party to put the environment at the heart of everything we do. Our economic prosperity depends on the health of our environment. It is the ultimate source of everything we make and use - from food and materials, to the air we breathe. The Green Party would set an inspiring vision for the natural world, both on land and at sea, with thriving species, healthy habitats, and ensuring the environment is top of the political agenda. A thriving environment means a healthy future for you, your children and generations to come. Our policies: &bull; An Environmental Protection Act to safeguard and restore our environment, protect and enhance biodiversity, promote sustainable food and farming, and ensure animal protection. &bull; A public works programme of insulation to make every home warm and investing in flood defences and natural flood management to make every community safer. &bull; Equality of access to nature and green spaces, to enhance leisure, health and wellbeing. &bull; Active ongoing cooperation with businesses and other countries to limit global temperature increases to well below 2 degrees and aiming for 1.5 degrees. &bull; Replacing fracking, coal power stations, subsidies to fossil fuels and nuclear with the clean green efficient renewable energy of the future, and investing in community owned energy. &bull; Introduce a one-off fine on car manufacturers who cheated the emissions testing regime and create a new Clean Air Act, expanding and funding a mandatory clean air zone network. &bull; Strong protection for the Green Belt, National Parks, SSSIs and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. &bull; A wider, more effective network of marine protected areas around our coasts, including fully protected no take zones. &bull; Tough action to reduce plastic and other waste, including the introduction of Deposit Return Schemes, with a zero waste target. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=7> MEMBERSHIP OF THE EU The Green Party supported the Remain campaign and continue to believe that membership of the EU makes our future more hopeful and secure. We will demand that the terms of the final deal are closely scrutinised. We do not accept that either a "hard" Brexit or an exit from the EU without a deal is in the interests of the British people. We will be actively campaigning to safeguard jobs, uphold basic rights and put environmental protection at the heart of any future trade deals. Our policies: &bull; A referendum on the detail of whatever deal is negotiated for Britain's departure from the EU, with the option to reject the deal and remain in the EU. &bull; Protect freedom of movement, press for remaining within the single market, and safeguard vital rights for people and the environment. &bull; Immediately guarantee the rights of EU citizens to remain in the UK and urgently seek reciprocal arrangements for UK citizens in the EU. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=9> OUR NHS AND PUBLIC SERVICES We pay for public services, we use them, we own them. It's time they belonged to all of us. From our hospitals to our railways and schools, the Green Party will campaign for public services that are run by the people for the people. These services will be properly resourced and future-facing to meet your needs now and in the future, not struggling to keep pace with demand. We will stand up for the NHS - we want it to be protected not privatised. Our policies: &bull; Roll back privatisation of the NHS to ensure that all health and dental services are always publicly provided and funded, and free at the point of access, via the introduction of an NHS Reinstatement Act. Scrap NHS Sustainability and Transformation Plans. &bull; Bring mental health care in line with physical health care and ensure people experiencing mental health crises are supported close to their home and support networks. Introduce mental health awareness training within the public sector and encourage a more open dialogue on the issue in wider society. &bull; Close the NHS spending gap and provide an immediate cash injection, to ensure everyone can access a GP, hospitals can run properly, and staff are fairly paid. &bull; Major investment in social care for the elderly and all those who need it. &bull; Bring energy, water, railways, buses, the Royal Mail and care work back into public ownership to give communities real control of the public services that has been lost over the past 30 years. &bull; Increase funding for local authorities so they can provide good quality public services and invest in our communities, creating thousands of jobs. A single budget covering health and social services, to make life easier for people who need to access several types of service. &bull; We will review the effectiveness of how public services are structured, sensitive to the needs of all people, including assessment of how care is provided at the transition age of 18. &bull; Redress pension injustice, with a pensions system for everyone and action to enable older people to continue to be active members of society. &bull; Redress benefits injustice with a social security system that gives everyone confidence they will get support when they need it, including disabled people. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=11> EDUCATION FOR ALL Education transforms lives. The Green &bull; Address the crisis of teacher Party believes that education is a right, workload, with measures such as and should therefore be available to abolishing Ofsted, and reforming the people of all ages. curriculum so that it is pupil-centred, freeing up teachers to We stand firmly alongside teachers, teach. parents, and young people in calling for the end of privatisation in education. &bull; Ensuring that every child with Special We should trust our teachers to teach, Educational Needs or Disability has instead of burdening them and our access to a mainstream education, in children with endless and stressful accordance with the UN Convention exams and inspections. for Persons with Disabilities. Our policies: &bull; Properly fund our schools so real term spending per pupil increases and is protected. &bull; Bring Academies and Free Schools into the local authority system, abolish SATS and reduce class sizes. &bull; Scrap university tuition fees, fund full student grants and greater public investment in further and higher education. &bull; Restore Education Maintenance Allowance and enable apprenticeships to all qualified young people aged 16-25. &bull; Free universal early education and childcare for all children, with formal education starting at age 7. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=13> OUR PROMISE TO YOUNG PEOPLE We want to build a better, more positive future for everyone and in particular for young people. We want that future to be safer, happier, more equal and more secure. Our promise to young people, written by young people, is that we will invest in education and opportunities, alongside lowering the voting age, protecting the environment, tackling the housing crisis and building a strong economy. Our policies: &bull; Protect young people's housing needs by reinstating housing benefit for under-21s, stop Local Authorities declaring young people "intentionally homeless", and invest in community house-building projects to provide affordable, secure housing options for young people. &bull; Create a fairer working world for young people by scrapping age-related wage bands and raising the national minimum wage to living wage levels for all. &bull; Protect opportunities for young people in work and education by relieving students of the burden of debt, scrapping tuition fees and restoring living grants. Guarantee the rights of young people to study, work, live and travel in the EU, including through schemes like Erasmus. &bull; Reject the xenophobic Prevent strategy and pursue community-led collaborative approaches to tackling all forms of extremism instead. &bull; Improve young people's access to basic but vital health needs, by providing more funding for sexual health awareness campaigns, providing greater access to free condoms and sexual health clinics; removing VAT from sanitary products and ensuring that they are provided free of charge to those in extreme financial need. &bull; Enable every young person to take an active role in democracy, introducing non-biased political education and promoting active citizenship, as well as lowering the voting age to 16. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=15> A PLACE TO CALL HOME We should all have a safe, affordable, secure and warm place to call home. The Green Party will tackle the causes of the housing crisis: giving renters a fair deal, making social housing widely available and bringing the housing market under control. Our policies: &bull; A living rent for all through rent controls and more secure tenancies for private renters, an end to letting fees and the introduction of mandatory licensing for all landlords. &bull; Giving tenants a voice by supporting the development of renters' unions. &bull; A major programme to build affordable, zero carbon homes, including 100,000 social rented homes each year by 2022. &bull; End mass council house sales and scrap Right to Buy at discounted prices. &bull; Abolish the cruel and unfair bedroom tax. &bull; Action on empty homes to bring them back into use and a trial of a Land Value Tax to encourage the use of vacant land and reduce speculation. &bull; Protect young people's housing needs by reinstating housing benefit for under 21s and reverse housing benefits cuts. &bull; Stop declaring people as &bquo;intentionally homeless&equo; and give Local Authorities the same duties towards single people and childless couples as to families. &bull; Help first-time buyers by aiming for house price stability - axing buy-to-let tax breaks, and backing community-led approaches to building affordable homes. &bull; Significantly improve housing choice for D/deaf, disabled and older people by requiring all councils to appropriately plan for their housing needs and significantly increase the numbers of homes built to lifetime home and mobility standards over the next 5 years. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=17> A SAFER WORLD The Green Party will work for a caring and confident Britain that uses its influence wisely, to build peace and protect the environment, and to offer sanctuary to those at risk. We would co-operate with our neighbours on the shared challenges that face us all - from tackling terrorism and preventing climate change, to reducing inequality. We would work towards an outward-facing Britain that has the confidence and resilience to welcome others. Our policies: &bull; Cancel Trident replacement, saving at least &pound;110 billion over the next 30 years. &bull; A humane immigration and asylum system that recognises and takes responsibility for Britain's ongoing role in causing the flow of migrants worldwide. &bull; Implement a UK-wide strategy to tackle gender based violence, including domestic violence, rape and sexual abuse, FGM and trafficking. &bull; An ethical foreign policy that builds capacity for conflict resolution, and ends support for aggressive wars of intervention. No more arms sales to oppressive regimes. &bull; Trade rules that respect human rights, labour standards, environmental standards and climate commitments with mechanisms for individuals, groups and communities to bring grievances. &bull; Strengthen the global deal on climate change, including by delivering climate justice and promoting ecologically sustainable development so that poorer countries can cope with the impacts of climate change. &bull; Increase the overseas aid budget from 0.7% of GDP to 1.0% of GDP. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=19> A CITIZENS' DEMOCRACY The Green Party believes that politics should be done by people - not to them. We want everyone to have a voice, not just those who have the loudest voices, the deepest pockets or the most powerful friends. We will work for a fair voting system in which every vote counts and to make sure that decisions made nationally and locally are based upon genuine consultation, negotiation and accountability. We believe fairness matters online and in the media too. We think the internet should be free of state and corporate surveillance, with our rights and freedoms protected. Our policies: &bull; Introduce proportional representation (PR) for parliamentary and local elections, and votes at 16. &bull; Increase diversity in representative politics, with job-shares, a 50/50 Parliament, and replacing the House of Lords with an elected second chamber. &bull; Defend the Human Rights Act and UK membership of the European Convention on Human Rights, and reinstate funding for the Equality and Human Rights Commission. &bull; Action to tackle racism and discrimination on the basis of faith or disability, real equality for LGBTIQA+ people, equal rights for mixed gender couples to have a Civil Partnership. &bull; Give power to local communities by allowing for 40% of the local electorate to secure a referendum on local government decisions or to recall their MP. &bull; End the sale of personal data, such as health or tax records, for commercial or other ends. &bull; Protect the BBC and tighten the rules on media ownership so no individual or company owns more than 20% of a media market, protecting against anyone having too much influence or undermining democracy. &bull; Give Parliament a vote on any new trade deals. &bull; Revive the role of democratic trade unions. &bull; Enable every young person to take an active role in democracy, introducing non-biased political education and promoting active citizenship. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> <page number=21> A PEOPLE'S TRANSPORT SYSTEM The Green Party will work to increase &bull; Invest in low traffic neighbourhoods public investment in the railways, trams, and safe, convenient networks ferries and buses, as well as to make our of routes for walking and cycling, streets and roads safer for everyone. including safe places for learning to cycle, so people of all ages and those Clean, safe, accessible public transport with disabilities can choose to make and more walking and cycling could local trips on foot, by bike or mobility make us all healthier and happier. We scooter. need a public transport system that takes us where we need to go, affordably and &bull; Help end the public health crisis reliably. It should be easy to choose to caused by air pollution by increasing leave the car at home - or not have one incentives to take diesel vehicles off at all. the roads. Our policies: &bull; Return the railways to public ownership and re-regulate buses, investing in increased bus services especially in rural and other poorly served areas. &bull; All public transport should be fully accessible and step-free with a phase-in of free local public transport for young people, students, people with disabilities, and older people. &bull; Invest in regional rail links and electrification of existing rail lines, especially in the South West and North of England, rather than wasting money on HS2 and the national major roads programme. &bull; Cancel all airport expansion and end subsidies on airline fuel. <footer text="A confident and caring Britain /"> 23 Final note: A number of policy areas discussed in this document are devolved to the Welsh Assembly. Where this applies, the policy set out here will only apply to England. facebook.com/TheGreenParty @TheGreenParty www.GreenParty.org.uk <footer text="Published by Judy Maciejowska on behalf of the Green Party of England and Wales, both at The Biscuit Factory, Unit 201 A Block, 100 Clements Road, London, SE16 4DG.">