NIGEL FARAGERICHARD TICEA CLEAN-BREAK BREXIT IS THE KEY TO CHANGING BRITAIN FOR GOODOur priority is to Leave the European Union and deliver the Brexit that 17.4m voted for in 2016. Acting on the biggest popular mandate in British history is crucial to restore faith in our democracy. What sort of democratic society do we live in, if a few Parliamentarians can defy the expressed will of the people? Leaving the undemocratic EU is just the beginning. It will be the first step in a political revolution. We want fundamental democratic reforms to fix our broken political system and make Parliament serve the People.A Clean-Break Brexit can also shape the future of our economy and society. It will give us the freedom to shape our future by taking immediate control of our own laws, borders, money, fishing and defence. We want to cancel HS2, save 50% of the foreign aid budget and save another £13bn a year in payments to the EU. That money can form part of a Brexit dividend to invest billions in Britain’s Regions, cut the cost of living, and build a better future for millions of our people.NIGEL FARAGELeader of The Brexit PartyThe old mainstream parties have made ‘manifesto’ a dirty word. Everybody knows that a manifesto is little more than a set of vague promises that its authors have no intention of keeping. By contrast, our Contract with the People is a targeted set of deliverable pledges. We are not seeking election as a government. We are seeking to deliver the Brexit that we were promised three and a half years ago.With a Clean-Break Brexit, we can start changing Britain for good from day one. There will be no extended ‘transition period’, no more years of wrangling with Brussels, no further entanglement with the EU’s controlling political institutions. We will be free to start building our future immediately, to change politics and Britain for good. And that’s a promise.A POLITICAL REVOLUTION The way the political Establishment has conspired to frustrate democracy over Brexit has highlighted the need for fundamental political reform. The Brexit Party can deliver real democratic change because we are not part of the Westminster status quo. It is now time for a debate on a written constitution. We pledge to:• Reform the voting system to make it more representative.• Abolish the unelected House of Lords.• Make MPs who switch parties subject to recall petitions.• Overhaul the postal voting system to combat fraud and abuse. • Reform the Supreme Court – judges who play a role in politics must be subject to political scrutiny. Ensure political balance by broadening participation in the Selection Commission or conduct interviews by Parliamentary Committee.• Make the Civil Service more accountable to the public – we would require civil servants to sign an oath to act with political neutrality.• Phase out the BBC licence fee. • Require Universities to incorporate an obligation to protect legal free speech. • Introduce Citizens’ Initiatives to allow people to call referendums, subject to a 5m threshold of registered voter signatures and time limitations on repeat votes.WE PLEDGE TO INTRODUCE CITIZENS’ INITIATIVES TO ALLOW PEOPLE TO CALL REFERENDUMSTHE BREXIT DIVIDENDThe Brexit Party supports policies aimed at regional regeneration, supporting key sectors of the economy and targeted investments in the young, the High Street and families. We pledge to:• Raise £200bn by:- Scrapping HS2- Keeping the £13bn annual EU contribution- Recovering our £7bn from the EIB - Redirecting 50% of the foreign aid budget (£40bn over a five-year term).• Invest at least £50bn in local road and rail schemes in our development-starved regions.• Invest in digital infrastructure: partner with service providers to offer free base level domestic broadband in deprived regions and free Wi-Fi on all public transport.• Invest in our High Streets: alongside our reforms to Corporation Tax, we will replace business rates with a simpler system to assist small High Street retailers and leisure operators outside the M25, with any reductions funded by an online sales tax. • Invest in young people: scrap interest on student loans, which will improve the debt recovery rate, and introduce a new workable apprenticeship scheme.• Abolish Inheritance Tax (IHT). This hated ‘grief’ tax raises less than 1% of total tax revenue. It is ‘double taxation’ on a lifetime’s assets, levied at a time of family distress.WE PLEDGE TO ABOLISH INHERITANCE TAXINVEST IN THE FUTUREThe Brexit Party supports investment in key public services, the environment, fishing and strategic industries – partly financed by saving our annual contribution to the EU. We pledge to:• Invest £2.5bn in our Fishing and Coastal Communities: with a Clean-Break Brexit we recover control of a 200 mile exclusive economic zone (or the median line), creating the opportunity to regenerate our coastal communities with new investment, jobs and tourism.• Invest in the Environment: in addition to planting millions of trees to capture CO2 we will promote a global initiative at the UN.• Recycle our own waste and make it illegal for it to be exported across the world to be burnt, buried or dumped at sea.• Invest in the NHS and Social Care: we need to keep investing in these essential and treasured public services — with more medical staff and less waste.• Invest in Strategic Industries: freed from EU rules on state aid, we can invest in strategic industries such as steel, railways and defence to create thousands of jobs.FREED FROM EU RULES ON STATE AID, WE CAN INVEST IN STRATEGIC INDUSTRIES TO CREATE THOUSANDS OF JOBSRICHARD TICEChairman of The Brexit PartyCUT THE COST OF LIVINGA Clean-Break Brexit is a chance to reduce the cost of living for working families. The impact of EU policies on energy prices costs us jobs and punishes the poorest in society, while the EU Customs Union prevents us cutting tariffs on non-EU imports. We pledge to:• Cut VAT on domestic fuel: EU rules stop us reducing our VAT rates. We will zero rate VAT on domestic fuel to reduce energy bills — saving an average £65 per household.• Reduce import tariffs: 20% of UK food items are sourced from outside the EU. A Clean-Break Brexit will allow us to reduce tariffs to zero on certain foods, footwear and clothing. WE PLEDGE TO CUT VAT ON DOMESTIC FUEL TO REDUCE ENERGY BILLS TURBO-CHARGE THE ECONOMYWe want to attract investment and jobs with a series of targeted incentives to drive growth and increase the tax take. We pledge to:• Zero rate Corporation Tax for the first £10,000 of pre-tax profits: one million companies - some 66% of the total number - pay less than £10,000. This represents just 6% of Corporation Tax take in 2019; £3.4bn. Total cost £5.1bn per year.• Maintain subsidies and grants paid by the EU to UK businesses such as farmers, fisheries, universities and research bodies: this is our money anyway, recycled by the EU.• Provide transitional relief to key sectors such as the automotive industry, to ensure a smooth Brexit.• Create Freeports in certain regions to encourage investment and create new jobs.• Overhaul financial services regulation, cut red tape, increase competition and boost lending to Small and Medium Enterprises.WE PLEDGE TO ZERO RATE CORPORATION TAX FOR THE FIRST £10,000 OF PRE-TAX PROFITS, BOOSTING THOUSANDS OF SMALLER COMPANIESPROTECT BRITAIN’S BORDERSAND PEOPLEA Clean-Break Brexit means that we can control our own national security and borders, free from entanglement in the EU’s integrated defence and discriminatory immigration policies. We pledge to:• Ensure that the UK maintains its commitment to NATO and meets its commitment to spend 2% of GDP on defence as an absolute minimum. • Withdraw from the European Defence Union. This will mean we leave the EU defence procurement directive ensuring the UK has the right to stipulate defence contracts stay at home.• Crack down on illegal immigration and stop the human tragedy associated with human trafficking.• Reduce annual immigration and address wage stagnation and the skills gap by introducing a fair points system that is blind to ethnic origin. And always provide a humane welcome for genuine refugees.• Increase police numbers — more visible policing, ensure focus on combating violent crime, robbery and burglary rather than enforcing restrictions on free speech.• Target the menace of County Lines drug dealers, gangs and the growth of knife crime.• Abolish distortive targets and introduce sentence ‘ranges’ for young offenders, to encourage rehabilitation.WE PLEDGE TO REDUCE ANNUAL IMMIGRATION THROUGH A FAIR POINTS SYSTEM THAT IS BLIND TO ETHNIC ORIGININVEST IN THE NHSWe need to develop a National Health Service fit for the 21st Century. The Brexit Party believes in continued investment in the NHS, better management, increasing the number of medical staff and cutting waste. We want the NHS to be a beacon of excellent care. It was the Labour governments of Blair and Brown that burdened the NHS with billions of pounds of debt through their Private Finance Initiatives.• The NHS must remain a publically-owned, comprehensive service that is free at the point of use. Your postcode should not determine your care or health.• There should be no privatisation of the NHS; where existing private initiatives have failed to deliver we will return them to public ownership.• We support investment in medical research and development and will stop the taxpayer being ripped off by pharmaceutical companies.• Abolish all politically imposed hospital targets that distort clinical priorities.• Re-open the nursing and midwifery professions to recruitment without the degree requirement, alongside a new nursing qualification in social care.• Introduce 24-hour GP surgeries to relieve the strain in A&E departments.• Have a national debate on our NHS, involving the public alongside MPs, doctors and experts. We should discuss ring-fencing the NHS budget and the tax revenues that pay for it. THERE SHOULD BE NO PRIVATISATION OF THE NHS. WE WILL RETURN FAILED PRIVATE INITIATIVES TO PUBLIC OWNERSHIP DR DAVID BULL MEPHealth Spokesman for The Brexit PartyINVEST IN EDUCATIONBritain’s future in the world depends on improving our education for young people and giving employers a positive role in training and apprenticeships. We pledge to:• Further expand parental choice — academies and free schools have improved results.• Abolish student loan interest.• Abolish the target to push 50% of young people into Higher Education.• Scrap the cumbersome Apprentice Levy — apprenticeships have collapsed. Improve tax incentives for employers to take on genuine apprentices. WE PLEDGE TO ABOLISH ALL INTEREST ON STUDENT LOANSREFORM UNIVERSAL CREDITProviding a safety net for those in need is a defining mark of a civilised society. The Universal Credit system has not achieved what was intended and needs to be revisited. We pledge to:• Support those who have paid into the system with accelerated payment processes (five-week maximum), and continue to root out fraud.• Undertake a 12-month review of the system and bring in reforms within two years. • Review the position of women unexpectedly short-changed by recent rises in the state pension age. • Extend the use of dormant funds to support civil society.REBUILD THE HOUSING SYSTEMWe need to simplify the planning and development processes to encourage small and medium sized developers, accelerating the pace of development to increase housing supply. We pledge to:• Simplify planning consents for Brownfield sites.• Change the funding model to make it easier for councils to borrow from central government to build council houses.• Accelerate infrastructure grants funding to kick start schemes of marginal viability.• Change the process for outline planning consent.• Introduce more flexibility on the size and type of units as part of a development.• Allow more flexibility in the number of affordable homes within a development scheme.WWW.THEBREXITPARTY.ORGPromoted by Paul Oakden on behalf of The Brexit Party, both of 83 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0HW.Printed by the Color Company, 27a Poland Street, London, W1F 8QW