Contents 

&bullet; 
Foreword...........................................................................................................................................................................................3 
&bullet; 
Bold actions to deliver a secure future for our country and for your family ...................4 
&bullet; 
Our plan for a secure, dynamic and growing economy.......................................................................5 
&bullet; 
Our plan to cut taxes and protect pensions..................................................................................................13 
&bullet; 
Our plan to support families ........................................................................................................................................17 
&bullet; 
Our plan to get more people into work and build a fairer welfare system.....................21 
&bullet; 
Our plan to give young people the opportunities and skills they need...........................25 
&bullet; 
Our plan to secure our nation from global uncertainty................................................................... 29 
&bullet; 
Our plan to control immigration and stop illegal immigration...................................................35 
&bullet; 
Our plan to deliver better health and social care...................................................................................39 
&bullet; 
Our plan for safer streets and justice for victims of crime.............................................................43 
&bullet; 
Our plan for an affordable and pragmatic transition to net zero............................................47 
&bullet; 
Our plan to build more houses in the right places.................................................................................51 
&bullet; 
Our plan to strengthen communities ................................................................................................................55 
&bullet; 
Our plan to back farmers and fisheries to grow our food security.........................................61 
&bullet; 
Our plan to support our rural way of life and enhance our environment ......................65 
&bullet; 
Our plan to support sport and the creative sector...............................................................................69 
&bullet; 
Our plan to strengthen the United Kingdom...............................................................................................71 

<pb/>
We are restoring our economic stability after 
Covid and Ukraine. Inflation is down, real 
wages are up, growth has returned - and 
we are cutting taxes to give working people 
financial security. This did not happen by 
accident. The economy is turning a corner 
because we built strong economic foundations 
before the pandemic and we have stuck to our 
plan. 

We must stick to this plan and take bold action 
to secure the future of our nation and society. 
In the next decade, we'll face challenges to 
our energy and national security from foreign 
conflicts; to our border from uncontrolled and 
illegal migration; to our economy from global 
shocks and to our society from those seeking 
to divide and disempower communities. 
Dealing with these challenges requires a clear 
plan and bold action. 

We have that plan and the courage to take the 
bold steps necessary to build a secure future 
for you and your family. 

A future where hard work and doing the right 
thing is always rewarded, not punished with 
higher taxes and hidden green levies, or 
discouraged with unconstrained welfare. 

A future where aspiration and opportunity are 
celebrated and young people always get the 
skills they need to succeed. 

A future where public services, like the NHS, 
serve citizens not vested interests, and every 
citizen upholds British values of decency, 
democracy and service. 

A future, where national, border, energy and 
food security are put first, not taken for granted, 
and immigration is never allowed to run out of 
control. 

A future where family is always supported and 
communities decide their own priorities, rather 
than having them imposed from above. 

A future where we can have pride - in 
ourselves, in our communities and in our 
country. 

There is only one way to secure that future - 
and that is to vote Conservative on 4 July. 

We must stick with the plan - a plan that has 
given four million more people the security 
and purpose of a job, cut taxes for 29 million 
working people, protected pensioners with 
the Triple Lock, delivered more than 2.5 
million homes, recruited record numbers of 
police officers to cut crime by more than 50%, 
recruited record numbers of teachers to help 
our children become the best readers in the 
West, delivered the largest sustained increase 
in defence spending since the end of the Cold 
War and got Brexit done. 

The alternative is we go back to square one. 
To a fragile economy under Labour driven 
by unfunded spending, higher taxes on 
working families and debt piling up for future 
generations to pay off. And where immigration, 
crime and defence are not taken seriously. 

On 4 July, choose lower immigration, lower 
taxes and protected pensions. Choose a secure 
future with the Conservatives. 


The Rt Hon Rishi Sunak 

Prime Minister and 
Leader of the Conservative and Unionist Party 

<pb/>
Bold actions to deliver a secure future 
for our country and for your family 

To support working people and secure a 
stronger economy 

&bullet; 
Cut tax for workers by taking another 2p off 
employee National Insurance so that we will have 
halved it from 12% at the beginning of this year to 6% 
by April 2027, a total tax cut of &pound;1,350 for the average 
worker on &pound;35,000 - and the next step in our longterm 
ambition to end the double tax on work when 
financial conditions allow. 

&bullet; 
Cut taxes to support the self-employed by abolishing 
the main rate of self-employed National Insurance 
entirely by the end of the Parliament. 

&bullet; 
Cut tax for pensioners with the new Triple Lock Plus, 
guaranteeing that both the State Pension and the tax 
free allowance for pensioners always rise with the 
highest of inflation, earnings or 2.5% - so the new 
State Pension doesn't get dragged into income tax. 

&bullet; 
Give working parents 30 hours of free childcare a 
week from when their child is nine months old to 
when they start school, saving eligible families an 
average of &pound;6,900 per year. 

&bullet; 
End the unfairness in Child Benefit by moving to a 
household system, so families don't start losing Child 
Benefit until their combined income reaches &pound;120,000 

- saving the average family which benefits &pound;1,500. 
&bullet; 
Cut the cost of net zero for consumers by taking a 
more pragmatic approach, guaranteeing no new 
green levies or charges while accelerating the rollout 
of renewables. 

&bullet; 
Seize the benefits of Brexit by signing further trade 
deals, speeding up infrastructure and unblocking 
100,000 homes, cutting red tape for business, and 
creating new fishing opportunities. 

To provide young people with a secure future 

&bullet; 
Give young people the skills and opportunities they 
deserve by introducing mandatory National Service 
for all school leavers at 18, with the choice between a 
competitive placement in the military or civic service 
roles. 

&bullet; 
Fund 100,000 high-quality apprenticeships for young 
people, paid for by curbing the number of poor-quality 
university degrees that leave young people worse off. 

&bullet; 
Protect children by requiring schools to ban the use 
of mobile phones during the school day and ensuring 
parents can see what their children are being taught, 
especially on sensitive matters like sex education. 

&bullet; 
Transform 16-19 education by introducing the 
Advanced British Standard, enabling young people 
to receive a broader education and removing the 
artificial divide between academic and technical 
learning. 

To safeguard our borders and national 
security 

&bullet; 
Boost defence spending to our new NATO 
standard of 2.5% of GDP by 2030, so we can 
protect British interests at home and abroad in an 
increasingly hostile world. 

&bullet; 
Introduce a legal cap on migration to guarantee 
that numbers will fall every year, so public 
services are protected while bringing in the skills 
our businesses and NHS needs. 

&bullet; 
Stop the boats by removing illegal migrants to 
Rwanda. 

&bullet; 
Work with other countries to rewrite asylum 
treaties to make them fit for the challenges we 
face. 

To strengthen our communities 

&bullet; 
Increase NHS spending above inflation every 
year, recruiting 92,000 more nurses and 28,000 
more doctors, driving up productivity in the NHS 
and moving care closer to people's homes through 
Pharmacy First, new and modernised GP surgeries 
and more Community Diagnostic Centres. 

&bullet; 
Protect female-only spaces and competitiveness in 
sport by making clear that sex means biological 
sex in the Equality Act. 

&bullet; 
Deliver 1.6 million well-designed homes in the 
right places while protecting our countryside, 
permanently abolish Stamp Duty for homes up 
to &pound;425,000 for first time buyers and introduce a 
new Help to Buy scheme. 

&bullet; 
Recruit 8,000 more full-time, fully warranted 
police officers to ensure a new police officer for 
every neighbourhood. 

&bullet; 
Cut anti-social behaviour in town centres by 
rolling out Hotspot Policing, expanding community 
payback and legislating to evict social tenants who 
repeatedly disrupt their neighbours. 

&bullet; 
Invest &pound;36 billion in local roads, rail and buses 
to drive regional growth, including &pound;8.3 billion 
to fill potholes and resurface roads, funded by 
cancelling the second phase of HS2. 

&bullet; 
Back drivers by stopping road pricing, reversing 
the London Mayor's ULEZ expansion and applying 
local referendums to new 20mph zones and Low 
Traffic Neighbourhoods. 

&bullet; 
Champion our rural communities by backing 
farmers with a legal target and additional 
investment for food security, and protecting our 
best agricultural land from solar farms. 

&bullet; 
Continue to directly invest in communities across 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, protect 
the UK's internal market and the integrity of our 
United Kingdom. 


<pb/>
In 2010 we inherited an 
economy in tatters, with Labour 
admitting themselves there was 
'no money'. We have faced three 
generational global economic 
challenges: the aftermath of the 
financial crisis; a global pandemic; 
and the biggest energy shock since 
the 1970s. 
Against this backdrop, since 2010 the UK has 
had the third highest growth rate in the G7. 
We have created four million more jobs, cut 
taxes for working people and pensioners and 
repaired the public finances. The UK economy 
is now growing faster than Germany, France, 
Italy and the United States, real wages have 
been rising for nearly a year, inflation has fallen 
from 11.1% to 2.3%, lower than in Europe and the 
US, and debt as a share of GDP is forecast to 
start falling next year. The plan we set out last 
year, to halve inflation, grow the economy and 
reduce debt, is working. 

Economic security is the bedrock of any future 
success, which is why we have a clear plan to 
take the bold action needed to build a strong 
economy. 

&bullet; 
reducing borrowing and debt; 

&bullet; 
backing businesses to invest, innovate and 
trade; 

&bullet; 
cutting taxes and reforming our welfare 
system; 

&bullet; 
delivering world-class education; and 

&bullet; 
delivering an affordable transition to 
domestic, sustainable energy. 

Reducing debt and 
borrowing 

Sustainable public finances are essential for a 
strong economic plan. It was only because of the 
difficult decisions we took to repair the public 

finances after 2010, which saw the deficit fall from 
10.3% under Labour to 2.1% on the eve of the 
pandemic, that we were able to provide almost 
&pound;400 billion of support to families and businesses 
to get through Covid and the energy shock. 

The only way to give people the peace of 
mind that government will be able to support 
them again when future shocks hit is to get 
borrowing and debt down. The alternative is to 
let borrowing get out of control, driving inflation 
and interest rates up, and leaving our children 
and grandchildren to pick up the bill. 

In the next Parliament, we will continue to meet 
our fiscal rules of having public sector net debt 
falling and for public sector net borrowing to 
be below 3% of GDP in the fifth year of the 
forecast. The measures in this manifesto 
are fully funded and would result in lower 
borrowing in 2029-30, which will be the 
target year for our fiscal rules in the first fiscal 
event of the new Parliament. 

Backing business to invest,
innovate and trade 

A competitive tax system 

The Conservative Party will always be the 
party of business. It is the private sector 
which will unlock the investment, growth and 
opportunities of the future. 

That is why a tax system that incentivises 
business to invest is at the heart of our 
economic plan. We introduced the biggest 
business tax cut in modern British history, 
which hundreds of business leaders have 
described as the 'single most transformational' 
measure for growth and investment. So more 
businesses can benefit, we will look to extend 
our 'full expensing' policy to leasing, once 
the fiscal conditions allow. And we will not 
raise corporation tax. For the very smallest 
businesses, the four million people who are 
self-employed, we will abolish the main rate 
of National Insurance entirely by the end 
of the next Parliament. We will back the risk 


<pb/>
takers and entrepreneurs who help drive our 
economy. 

Small and medium-sized businesses are the 
lifeblood of our economy and we are making 
the UK the best place in the world to start or 
grow a business. We have great foundations: 
world-class talent, an internationally envied 
legal system and a business-friendly regulatory 
environment. 

We are supporting firms with a business rates 
support package worth &pound;4.3 billion over the 
next five years to support small businesses 
and the high street. We want small businesses 
to get a bigger share of public contracts and 
have improved the public sector procurement 
system to that end. We have made it easier 
and cheaper for small businesses to hire an 
apprentice. And we have taken 28,000 small 
businesses out of paying VAT altogether 
by raising the VAT registration threshold to 
&pound;90,000. In the next Parliament, we will deliver 
a ten point plan to support SMEs: 

1. Continue to ease the burden of business 
rates for high street, leisure and hospitality 
businesses by increasing the multiplier on 
distribution warehouses that support online 
shopping over time. 

2. Keep the VAT threshold under review and 
explore options to smooth the cliff edge at 
&pound;90,000. 

3. Improve access to finance for SMEs including 
through expanding Open Finance and by 
exploring the creation of Regional Mutual Banks. 

4. Take more companies out of the scope of 
burdensome reporting requirements. Making 
use of freedoms granted by Brexit, we will lift the 
employee threshold allowing more companies to 
be considered medium-sized. This is expected to 
save small businesses at least one million hours 
of admin per year. 

5. Retain key tax incentives that encourage 
small businesses to grow, including the 
Enterprise Investment Scheme, Seed Enterprise 
Investment Scheme, Venture Capital Trusts, 
Business Asset Disposal Relief, Agricultural 

Property Relief and Business Relief. We will not 
increase Capital Gains Tax. 

6. Promote digital invoicing and improve 
enforcement of the Prompt Payment Code 

to support small businesses with the perennial 
challenge of cashflow, building on our creation of 
the Small Business Commissioner with powers to 
tackle unfavourable payment practices. 

7. Ensure that Basel III capital requirements do 
not inhibit lending to SMEs. 

8. Continue our world leading programmes 

including the Invest in Women Task Force and 
the Lilac Review to encourage more female and 
disabled entrepreneurs. 

9. Work with the British Business Bank and 
private sector fund managers to secure a &pound;250 
million Invest In Women Fund to support female 
entrepreneurs. 

10. Work with public sector organisations 

including local authorities and NHS trusts 
and companies benefitting from government 
contracts to ensure that procurement 
opportunities are focused on SMEs in their local 
economies where possible and practical. 

Investing in infrastructure 

A Conservative Government will continue 
to invest in the digital, transport and energy 
infrastructure needed for businesses to grow. 

We have transformed our digital infrastructure 
by rolling out gigabit broadband to over a 
million hard to reach premises, helping to 
deliver high-speed internet to over 80% of 
the country. We are set to achieve at least 
85% gigabit coverage of the UK by 2025 and 
nationwide coverage by 2030. Our ambition 
is for all populated areas to be covered by 
'standalone' 5G mobile connectivity and to 
keep the UK at the forefront of adopting and 
developing 6G. 

We will spend &pound;36 billion of HS2 savings on 
transport projects that will benefit more people, 
in more places, more quickly. Every penny 
saved in the North or Midlands will be spent 
there. Savings from our new plan for Euston, 

<pb/>
which will see 10,000 new homes built, have 
freed up &pound;6.5 billion for transport across the 
rest of the country. 

Labour has no plan. They neither support 
the second phase of HS2 nor our alternative 
package of investment, meaning they won't 
back schemes their own local leaders say will 
transform their areas. We will: 

&bullet; 
Invest &pound;4.7 billion for smaller cities, towns 
and rural areas in the North and Midlands 
to spend on their transport priorities. This will 
cut congestion and upgrade local bus and 
train stations. 

&bullet; 
Invest a record &pound;8.3 billion of investment 
to fill potholes and resurface roads. We will 
bring forward funding into this financial year 
and the next. 

&bullet; 
Back our city regions with an additional 
&pound;8.55 billion to spend on their local priorities. 
We will scrap rules that stop Mayors investing 
in strategic roads. 

&bullet; 
Deliver our plan for Northern Powerhouse 
Rail bringing more frequent trains, more 
capacity and faster journeys. We have 
committed &pound;12 billion on top of our HS2 
savings to deliver the section of Northern 
Powerhouse Rail between Manchester and 
Liverpool. Savings from HS2 enable us to 
fund electrification to Hull and build a new 
station in Bradford. 

&bullet; 
Boost rail connectivity in the Midlands, 
with &pound;1.75 billion to fund the Midlands Rail 
Hub in full. This will improve journey times 
and deliver more frequent rail services at 
50 stations, benefiting over seven million 
people. We will upgrade the line between 
Newark and Nottingham to halve journey 
times between Nottingham and Leeds. 

&bullet; 
Provide an additional &pound;1 billion to support 
hundreds of new bus routes across the 
North and Midlands. 

&bullet; 
Improve accessibility at 100 train stations, 

starting with the 50 stations announced in 
May. 

&bullet; 
Deliver upgrades to railways in the South 
West, including the line through Dawlish, the 
Energy Coast Line in Cumbria and the Ely 
Junction scheme in East Anglia. 

&bullet; 
Electrify the North Wales Main Line with 
&pound;1 billion of investment and alleviate pinch 
points on the A75 between Gretna and 
Stranraer. 

&bullet; 
Reopen Beeching lines and stations to 
reconnect communities around the country, 
building on the success of the Dartmoor Line 
in the South West. We are committed to all 
the schemes set out in the Network North 
Command Paper. 

This comes on top of &pound;44 billion of funding 
for Network Rail over the next five years and 
our investment in the Transpennine Route 
Upgrade, laying the foundations for Northern 
Powerhouse Rail. We will complete HS2 
between London Euston and the West Midlands 
and support the growth of the rail freight sector. 

We have invested &pound;40 billion in England's 
strategic roads between 2015 and 2025, with 
further investment to come in the next Road 
Investment Strategy, ensuring we can deliver 
major roads including the Lower Thames 
Crossing and the A303. This is alongside the 
road schemes set out in our Network North 
plan, including the A1 between Morpeth and 
Ellingham. 

Automated vehicles will be on British roads in 
the next Parliament, thanks to our new world-
leading legislation. We will support people to 
choose electric cars by ensuring our charging 
infrastructure is truly nationwide, including rapid 
charging and delivering the Zero Emission 
Vehicle Mandate to support manufacturers to 
safeguard skilled British jobs. 

We will support the growth and decarbonisation 
of our aviation sector. We will back British 
Sustainable Aviation Fuel through our SAF 


<pb/>
mandate, an industry-backed revenue support 
mechanism and investment in future aviation 
technology. We will support domestic flights 
including through Public Service Obligations, 
protecting vital routes within the UK, including 
to islands and remote areas. 

We will back our maritime sector, including 
shipping and ports, as it decarbonises. Recognising 
the current challenges with cross-Solent transport, 
we will establish a review to explore all options to 
provide more choice and drive down fares. We will 
foster our science and innovation expertise in the 

We can only achieve our infrastructure ambitions if we 
continue to simplify the planning system to make it easier to 
build, faster. We will speed up the average time it takes to 
sign off major infrastructure projects from four years toone. We will: 
&bullet;Introduce reforms to outdated EU red tape to better protect 
nature while enabling the building of new homes, new 
prisons and new energy schemes. Along with the reforms 
to the EU's bureaucratic environmental impact assessment 
regime that we have already started, these changes will 
speed up local and national infrastructure planning 
systems. 
&bullet;Ensureanyrequirementstooffsettheimpactofnewinfrastructure and homes on an area are proportionate, 
without compromising environmental outcomes. 
&bullet;Reduce the cost of infrastructure by allowing quicker 
changes to consented projects. 
&bullet;Ensure National Policy Statements are regularly updated. 
&bullet;Focus the role of statutory consultees in the planning 
system on improving projects in line with clearer 
objectives, rather than piecemeal requirements that add 
delays. 
&bullet;End frivolous legal challenges that frustrate infrastructure 
delivery by amending the law so judicial reviews that don't 
have merit do not waste court time. 
Speeding up 
infrastructure delivery 
space industry. 

Securing the UK's position as a world 
leader in innovation 

Artificial intelligence (AI) will accelerate human 
progress in the 21st century, just as the steam 
engine and electricity did in the 19th century. 

The UK is well positioned to spearhead this 
transformation and is already leading global 
work on AI safety. Over the last 14 years, the 
Conservatives have turned the UK into a 
science and innovation superpower. The UK 
now has the highest level of direct government 
funding and tax support for business research 
and development (R&D) of any country in the 
OECD. We pioneered the fastest development 
and deployment of the Covid vaccine. The 
UK has Europe's leading tech ecosystem. We 
have secured improved financial terms to join 
Horizon. 

In the next Parliament, we will: 

&bullet; 
Increase public spending on R&D to &pound;22 
billion a year, up from &pound;20 billion this year. 

&bullet; 
Maintain our R&D tax reliefs. Recent 
changes worth &pound;280 million a year have 
simplified and improved R&D tax reliefs, 
including by bringing more SMEs into 
scope of the relief. 

&bullet; 
Continue investing over &pound;1.5 billion in 
large-scale compute clusters, assembling 
the raw processing power so we can 
take advantage of the potential of AI 
and support research into its safe and 
responsible use. 

&bullet; 
Push forward with our Advanced 
Manufacturing Plan, providing a &pound;4.5 
billion commitment to secure strategic 
manufacturing sectors including 
automotive, aerospace, life sciences and 
clean energy. 

&bullet; 
Build on the success of our nine specialist 
Catapults, which support innovation and 
de-risk the transition from research and 

<pb/>
delivery, distributing &pound;1.6 billion of funding 

across the country by 2028. 

We are proud to be the leading market for 
starting and growing a FinTech firm - part of 
our world-leading financial and professional 
services which supports the employment of 
almost 2.5 million people. We will build on 
the policies set out in the Edinburgh Reforms 

so that the UK continues to be the world's 
most innovative and competitive global 
financial centre. We will support the City of 
London's position as the leading global market 
through the implementation of the Mansion 
House reforms and measures such as a retail 
sale of NatWest shares. We will maintain the 
highest standards of consumer protection and 
prudential regulation to ensure there can never 
be a repeat of the banking crisis under the last 
Labour Government. 

The UK car industry is the jewel of our 
manufacturing crown. Last year the UK built 
over a million vehicles and secured &pound;23.7 
billion of private and public investment. We 
secured a &pound;4 billion investment in a new 
battery gigafactory to be built in Somerset, 
safeguarding the future of the Jaguar Land 
Rover plant in the West Midlands for decades 
to come. Contrary to dire warnings that Brexit 
would lead to major brands leaving our shores. 
Nissan is delivering up to &pound;2 billion of new 
investment to produce two new electric vehicle 
models in Sunderland and BMW made a &pound;600 
million investment to produce iconic all-electric 
Mini Coopers in Oxfordshire. 

We will always back our world-leading 
automotive industry, which faces 
unprecedented competition from China in the 
electric vehicles market. We stand ready to 
support domestic car manufacturers if there is 
evidence other countries are breaking global 
trade rules. 

Building new trade links to help 

British businesses thrive 

The UK is a global exporting superpower and is 
now the fourth biggest exporter in the world, 
having overtaken France, the Netherlands, and 
Japan. 

Having left the EU, we have seized the 
opportunity to negotiate trade deals that suit 
the UK, boosting our exports and creating jobs 
at home. UK exports are growing, reaching 
&pound;850 billion last year and service exports are at 
an all-time high. We have secured trade deals 
with 73 countries plus the EU and last year 
we removed &pound;1 million of trade barriers every 
single hour. 

Last year we signed a deal to join the 
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement 
for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), a modern 
and ambitious trade deal spanning economies 
across Asia and the Pacific. With the UK as a 
member, it will account for 15% of global GDP 
and in time is expected to boost UK GDP by 
around &pound;2 billion a year. 

We will complete free trade agreements with 
India and with the Gulf Cooperation Council, 
home to some of the world's biggest investors. 
And we will continue to pursue free trade 
agreements with countries such as Israel and 
Switzerland. 

Our Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) 
is the most comprehensive FTA the EU has 
ever agreed. We will build on it, but will not 
agree to anything in the forthcoming review 
of the TCA that would infringe our legal 
sovereignty or involve submission to the CJEU 
or dynamic alignment. We will take a tough 
approach on ensuring that the EU are meeting 
their commitments under the TCA and not 
discriminating against our exporters. 

We have always been clear the NHS and the 
services it provides are not on the table in 
trade negotiations. All food and drink products 
imported into the UK, including those from 
countries we have trade agreements with, must 
comply with the UK's high standards. We will 


<pb/>
always stand up for UK agriculture in our trade 
deals. 

The US is our single largest trading partner. We 
have signed the Atlantic Declaration and deals 
with eight US states, including Florida and 
Texas, with a combined GDP of &pound;5.7 trillion. And 
we will look to agree a free trade agreement 
with the US when they are ready to do so. 

Using our Brexit freedoms to deliver 
regulatory reform 

Conservatives believe in reducing the burden 
of regulation, freeing up businesses to thrive. 
We want small businesses free to innovate, 
balanced with proportionate protections 
for consumers and working people. We will 
never introduce Labour's package of French-
style union rules, which are a threat to jobs, 
our competitiveness and our economy. We 
will go further to transform the UK regulatory 
landscape, making sure regulators deliver the 
best outcomes for business, consumers and 
the environment. 

Thanks to Brexit, we have taken back control 
of our laws and freed British businesses from 
unnecessary burdens. We legislated to remove 
the principle of EU law supremacy and have 
undertaken a root-and-branch review of the 
more than 6,000 laws we had inherited from 
the EU. 

We have already repealed or reformed over 
2,000 EU laws and by July 2026 we will 
have repealed or reformed over half of the 
entire stock of EU law we inherited. Only the 
Conservatives will keep on removing EU laws 
from our statute book. Our Smarter Regulation 
approach has already saved 50 million hours of 
administrative time for business, saving them 
an estimated &pound;1 billion. 

We have also used post-Brexit tax freedoms, 
including introducing VAT-free installations 
of energy-efficient materials and replacing 
complex EU alcohol duty rates. And to protect 
our pubs we will maintain our Brexit Pubs 
Guarantee that means the duty on drinks on 

draught, such as beer and cider, will be less 
than in supermarkets. 

Cutting government bureaucracy 

We will make government more efficient, cut 
waste and attract the best and the brightest, by: 

&bullet; 
Returning the civil service to its prepandemic 
size to pay for our commitment 
to increase defence spending to 2.5% of 
GDP. 

&bullet; 
Halving the amount of taxpayers' money 
spent on external consultants. We will 
introduce controls on all 'Equality, Diversity 
and Inclusion' initiatives and spending. 

&bullet; 
Bring quango spending under control. 

&bullet; 
Moving 25,000 more civil servants outside 
of London, building on successes like the 
Darlington Economic Campus and hubs in 
Stoke-on-Trent and Wolverhampton. 

&bullet; 
Opening up civil service recruitment by 
requiring jobs to be advertised externally to 
identify the best candidates. 

&bullet; 
Doubling digital and AI expertise in the 
civil service, to take advantage of the latest 
technologies to transform public services. 

These reforms will allow us to achieve a 
significant productivity boost in Whitehall. If 
we returned public sector productivity to prepandemic 
levels that would deliver up to &pound;20 
billion of annual savings. The NHS Productivity 
Plan shows that the public sector can set out 
detailed plans for achieving a step-change in 
productivity, so we will require all Departments 
to deliver plans for 2% annual productivity 
growth at the next Spending Review. 

To limit the impact of industrial action on public 
services and balance the ability of workers 
to strike with the rights of the public, we will 
continue implementing our Minimum Service 
Levels legislation. 

<pb/>
12 

<pb/>
As Conservatives, we believe 
in lower taxes because people, 
not governments, make the best 
decisions about how to spend 
their money. But we can only ever 
cut taxes responsibly when we 
have a way to fund it sustainably, 
consistent with getting debt and 
borrowing down and in a way 
which does not send inflation 
spiralling. 
Because of the support we provided to families 
and businesses through Covid and the energy 
shock, we had to make difficult decisions to 
pay down our debts. But we were clear that 
once inflation was under control and the public 
finances were on a sustainable path, we would 
cut taxes. Because of the progress we have 
made, with inflation back to normal and debt on 
track to fall from next year, we have been able 
to afford to begin cutting taxes as part of our 
plan to reward work and grow the economy, 
all without increasing borrowing or cutting 
spending on public services. 

Cutting tax for workingpeople 

In the first half of this year, we began cutting 
National Insurance. It is unfair that working 
people pay two taxes on their income - income 
tax and National Insurance - when other 
people only pay income tax. 

Our long-term ambition, when it is affordable 
to do so, is to keep cutting National Insurance 
until it's gone, as part of our plan to make the 
tax system simpler and fairer. As the next step 
in that plan, we will cut employee National 
Insurance to 6% by April 2027 - meaning 
that we will have halved it from 12% at the 
beginning of this year, a total tax cut of 
&pound;1,350 for the average worker on &pound;35,000. 
This comes on top of the significant above 

inflation increase to the personal allowance we 
have delivered since 2010, nearly doubling it 
from &pound;6,475 to &pound;12,750. 

This means the tax burden on workers is falling, 
with the average earner paying the lowest 
effective personal tax rate since 1975 - lower 
than in the US, France, Germany or any G7 
country. 

As a further downpayment on our long-term 
ambition to abolish National Insurance, there 
is one group for whom we will make that 
a reality in the next Parliament. Last year, 
the main rate of National Insurance for the 
self-employed stood at 9%. To recognise 
the unique contribution of these risk-takers 
and entrepreneurs to our economy and 
the insecurity they face without the rights 
and protections that employees enjoy, 
we will abolish it entirely by the end of 
the next Parliament. The abolition of the 
main rate of Class 4 National Insurance 
contributions builds on our abolition of Class 
2 contributions for self-employed people 
from April this year. This will not affect their 
entitlement to the State Pension. This is a 
massive simplification of the tax system which 
means that 93% of self-employed people - 
four million of them - will no longer pay self-
employed National Insurance. 

As well as cutting National Insurance for 29 
million people, we will also not raise the rate 
of income tax or VAT. 

Increasing pay for workingpeople 

We introduced the National Living Wage in 
2016 and this year achieved our ambition of 
raising it to two thirds of median earnings - 
increasing it to &pound;11.44 per hour and extending it 
to cover all workers aged over 21. This ended 
low pay for those on the National Living Wage, 
with someone working full-time receiving a pay 
rise worth &pound;1,800. As a result of our personal 
tax cuts and increases in the minimum wage, 
the take-home pay of someone working full 


<pb/>
time on the National Living Wage has gone 
up by 35% in real terms since 2010. 

We will maintain the National Living Wage 
in each year of the next Parliament at 
two-thirds of median earnings. On current 
forecasts, that would mean it rising to around 
&pound;13 per hour, up from a minimum wage of &pound;5.80 
under Labour in 2010. 

We will ensure the UK retains the flexible and 
dynamic labour market that gives businesses 
the confidence to create jobs and invest in their 
workforce. The number of payrolled employees 
is at a near record high, and there are around 
four million more people in work than when we 
came to office in 2010. 

Cutting tax for pensioners 

We believe that those who have worked hard 
during their lives should have dignity and 
security in their retirement. We came to power 
in 2010 after Labour had hit pensioners with a 
&pound;118 billion pensions tax raid and a paltry 75p 
per week increase to the State Pension. 

Since 2010, we have made it a priority to give 
people peace of mind in their retirement. We 
introduced the Triple Lock, which has seen the 
basic State Pension rise by &pound;3,700 since 2010. 
This year, the new State Pension increased by 
&pound;900. 

We will continue to do everything we can to 
provide pensioners with dignity in retirement 
and ensure the new State Pension is not 
dragged into income tax for the first time in 
history by introducing the new Triple Lock 
Plus. This has two elements: 

1. Continuing to uprate the State Pension in 
line with the highest of prices, earnings 
or 2.5%. On current forecasts, this will 
mean the new State Pension increases by 
a further &pound;430 in April next year to &pound;11,970; 
and increases by &pound;1,685 a year to &pound;13,200 
by the end of the Parliament. 
2. Ensuring that from next year the tax-
free personal allowance for pensioners 
also rises by the highest of prices, 
earnings or 2.5%, guaranteeing that 
the new State Pension is always below 
the tax-free threshold. From April 2025, 
we will increase the personal allowance 
for pensioners by introducing a new 
age-related personal allowance. This is 
a tax cut of around &pound;100 for eight million 
pensioners next year - rising to &pound;275 a 
year by the end of the Parliament. 
Under our new Pensions Tax Guarantee, the 
Conservatives will not introduce any new taxes 
on pensions. We will maintain the 25% tax free 
lump sum and maintain tax relief on pension 
contributions at their marginal rate. We will not 
extend National Insurance to employer pension 
contributions. 

We will maintain all current pensioner benefits, 
including free bus passes, Winter Fuel 
Payments, free prescriptions and TV licences. 
We are carefully considering the Ombudsman 
report into WASPI women and will work with 
Parliament to provide an appropriate and swift 
response. 

By opposing the Triple Lock Plus, Labour's 
Retirement Tax will mean millions of pensioners 
paying more tax. It will also mean that for 
the first time in history, someone whose 
only income is the new State Pension will 
be dragged into paying income tax, which 
alongside making them worse off means the 
administrative burden of going through a tax 
assessment. 

Clamping down on taxavoidance 

It is vital we make sure people and companies 
are paying the tax they owe. That's why, 
since 2010, Conservative Governments have 
introduced over 200 measures to tackle tax 
non-compliance. In total across all the fiscal 
events we have delivered since 2010, the OBR 

<pb/>
has scored these measures as raising &pound;95 
billion across the forecasts it has produced - 
&pound;6.7 billion for each year. Building on that, we 

will raise at least a further &pound;6 billion a year 
from tackling tax avoidance and evasion by 
the end of the Parliament. 


<pb/>
The Conservatives have a 
plan to deliver a brighter future 
for the UK, one where families 
are supported and children are 
given the best chance to gain the 
skills they need to succeed. We 
are delivering the largest ever 
expansion of childcare in history: 
&bullet; 
Working parents of two-year-olds are now 
able to access 15 hours of free childcare, 
with over 200,000 two-year-olds already 
benefitting from the offer. 

&bullet; 
From September 2024, eligible parents 
of children between nine months and two 
years old will also be able to access 15 
hours free childcare. 

&bullet; 
From September 2025, all eligible parents 
with children from nine months old to when 
they start school will be able to access 30 
hours of free childcare a week. 

&bullet; 
Once the roll out is completed, families will 
save an average of &pound;6,900 per year. 

To help the childcare sector expand we have 
committed to increasing hourly funding rates 
over the next two years by an estimated &pound;500 
million and are helping the sector, including 
childminders, to hire more staff, create more 
places and spend less time on paperwork. And 
to give working parents more flexibility, we are 
investing &pound;300 million so that all parents can 
access wraparound childcare before and after 
school by September 2026. 

But families' needs don't stop when children 
start primary school, which is why Family 
Hubs support families all the way up until 
children reach adulthood. They back families 
in the early years, helping with things like 
breastfeeding support, antenatal care and 
early learning interventions, in addition to 
services like relationship support, stopping 
smoking services and youth services. Our plan 

has already delivered Family Hubs in over 75 
local authorities. We will go further to deliver 
a Family Hub in every local authority in 
England. 

We will improve the experiences of children 
in social care, because every child deserves 
to live in a safe and loving home. We will 
create more places in children's homes while 
prioritising keeping families together where 
that's best for the child through our Kinship 
Care Strategy and helping children grow up in 
loving adoptive families where that is a better 
option. We will also support those leaving care 
with housing, education and employment, 
in addition to expanding befriending and 
mentoring programmes for care leavers. 

Cutting tax for families 

In April, we raised the threshold at which 
individuals begin to lose Child Benefit from 
&pound;50,000 to &pound;60,000 and halved the rate at which 
it is withdrawn. This is the right thing for families 
and the right thing for the economy. 

But it still isn't fair that single earner households 
can start losing their Child Benefit when a 
household with two working parents and a 
much higher total income can keep it in full. 
We will end this unfairness by moving to a 
household rather than individual basis for 
Child Benefit. So nobody is worse off than 
under the current system, we will set the 
combined household income at which a family 
will start losing Child Benefit at &pound;120,000 and 
gradually remove it until household income 
reaches &pound;160,000, above which families will no 
longer receive Child Benefit. This will benefit 
over 700,000 households, each gaining an 
average of &pound;1,480 a year. 


<pb/>
Protecting children online 

Digital technology is a force for good. But as 
technology develops, we need to respond to 
the concerns many parents have. 

Children are spending much more of their 
time using screens, often unsupervised, with 
research finding 63% of eight to 11-year-olds are 
now using social media. We also know that the 
number of children suffering from mental illness 
is rising dramatically and children spend less 
time playing, sleeping and socialising. 

In the last decade, we have done more to 
protect children online than any other country. 
From next year, our Online Safety Act will 
make it a legal requirement for social media 
firms to protect children from illegal or harmful 
content online. This includes fining social media 
companies who shirk their responsibilities to 
keep children safe. 

But we need to do more to protect young 
people and empower parents to make 
decisions in the best interests of their children. 

We will put our guidance on banning mobile 
phones in the school day on a statutory 
footing which will require all schools to operate 
a ban, as the best schools already do. We will 
provide funding for schools to help them ban 
mobile phones where they need it. 

We will urgently consult on introducing further 
parental controls over access to social media. 
We know this is a complex area and we need 
more effective age verification and parental 
controls. That's why we will consult widely 
to get this right, including developing the 
necessary technology, in partnership with 
other countries who are considering similar 
measures. We expect to build on the existing 
responsibilities set out for social media 
companies under the Online Safety Act. 

<pb/>
20 

<pb/>
Our plan to get 
more people into 
work and build 
a fairer welfare 
system 


<pb/>
We believe in fairness and the 
value of hard work. Alongside a tax 
system that rewards work, we want 
a welfare system which supports 
everyone to fulfil their potential 
and live dignified and independent 
lives. There should always be a 
safety net for those who need it 
most; but those who can work to 
support themselves, should work, 
and they should be better off for 
doing so. 
Since 2010, we have delivered transformational 
reforms to put work at the heart of our welfare 
system. We have rolled out Universal Credit 
and cut its taper rate by 10p in the pound to 
make work pay. We've brought discipline to 
the system through tougher sanctions and 
conditionality. We introduced the household 
benefit cap and the two-child limit to make the 
system fairer to the taxpayers who pay for it 
and ensure benefits are always a safety net, not 
a lifestyle choice. 

All of this has delivered near record levels 
of employment and low unemployment, with 
around four million more people in work since 
we came to office. 

At the same time, we have protected the 
most vulnerable, safeguarding millions of 
jobs through the pandemic and delivering 
unprecedented support to help households 
through the energy shock from Putin's war. 

Since the pandemic, new challenges have 
emerged. The number of people who are 
economically inactive due to ill health has risen 
from 2 million to 2.8 million, with a significant 
increase in mental health conditions among 
younger people. As a result, the number of 
working age people claiming benefits is 
projected to grow at an unsustainable rate, 
with all the wasted human potential that entails. 

We are now spending &pound;69 billion a year on 
benefits for people of working age with a 
disability or health condition, a figure which 
has risen by two thirds since the pandemic. 
By the end of the decade, that spending is 
projected to increase to &pound;90 billion. It would be 
irresponsible not to take bold action to put 
the welfare system on a sustainable footing. 

So we will reform the system to make it fairer 
and more sustainable, unlocking the potential 
of millions of people and giving them the 
support they need to get into work. 

This next generation of welfare reforms will 
build a system fit for the post-pandemic world. 
They will give everyone who can the best 
possible chance of returning to work, while 
providing the right support to those who need 
it. With fewer people moving onto welfare and 
more people in work fulfilling their potential, we 
will save taxpayers &pound;12 billion a year. To deliver 
this, we will take a two-pronged approach. 

First, to address the unsustainable rise in 
benefit claims for people of working age with a 
disability or health condition, we will: 

&bullet; 
Reform our disability benefits so they 
are better targeted and reflect people's 
genuine needs, while delivering a step-
change in mental health provision. We 
will improve PIP assessments to provide a 
more objective consideration of people's 
needs and stop the number of claims from 
rising unsustainably. While people suffering 
with mental health conditions face 
significant challenges, it is not clear that 
they always face the same additional living 
costs as people with physical disabilities. 
We will look at the best way to provide 
support, including whether treatment or 
services could be more appropriate for 
some people than a monthly cash payment, 
while also delivering a dramatic expansion 
in mental health support. At the same time, 
we will make the assessment process 
simpler and fairer for those with the most 
severe conditions. 


<pb/>
&bullet; 
Tighten up how the benefits system 
assesses capability for work. People 
are now three times more likely to be 
assessed as not fit for any work and put on 
the highest tier of sickness benefits than 
they were a decade ago. We will change 
the assessments from September 2025 
so that those with more moderate mental 
health issues or mobility problems who 
could potentially engage with the world of 
work are given tailored support, instead 
of being written off on benefits. The OBR 
has forecast that these reforms will reduce 
the number of people on these benefits by 
424,000. 

&bullet; 
Overhaul the fit note process so that 
people are not being signed off sick as 
a default. Currently, 94% of fit notes are 
being signed off as 'not fit for work'. We 
will design a new system which moves 
the responsibility for issuing fit notes 
away from our hard-pressed GPs towards 
specialist work and health professionals, 
and we will test integrating this with the 
new WorkWell service to provide tailored 
support to help people stay in or get back 
to work. 

Second, to make sure that being on benefits 
remains a safety net, not a lifestyle choice, we 
will: 

&bullet; 
Introduce tougher sanctions rules so 
people who refuse to take up suitable jobs 
after 12 months on benefits can have their 
cases closed and their benefits removed 
entirely. We will bring forward the new 
claimant review point for the long-term 
unemployed from 18 months to 12 months. 
At the claimant review, Work Coaches will 
set renewed conditions for claimants. If 
they fail to accept or comply with those 
conditions, such as refusing a suitable job 
or a mandatory work placement, their claim 
will be closed and their benefits will stop. 

&bullet; 
Accelerate the rollout of Universal Credit 
to ensure it always pays to work. We will 
move all of those remaining on outdated 
legacy benefits onto Universal Credit, 
removing disincentives for them to work 
and ensuring they will always be better off 
in work. 

&bullet; 
Continue to clamp down on fraudsters. 

Since 2019 we have delivered cumulative 
scored savings of &pound;7.7 billion through 
measures we have taken to tackle fraud 
in the welfare system. Despite this, the 
level of welfare fraud remains far too high, 
having more than doubled during the 
pandemic. To deliver further savings, we 
will maintain our zero-tolerance approach 
to fraud. This will include a new Fraud 
Bill to give DWP powers similar to that 
of HMRC, so we can treat benefit fraud 
like we do tax fraud with new powers to 
identify, investigate and pursue fraudsters. 

We hugely value the work that unpaid carers do 
supporting their loved ones. We have increased 
Carer's Allowance by almost &pound;1,500 since 2010 
and given employees who are also unpaid 
carers entitlement to a period of unpaid leave. 
We will continue to stand behind our carers. 

The vast majority of parents work incredibly 
hard to give their children the best start in 
life, but sadly a small number shirk their 
responsibilities. We will reform the Child 
Maintenance Service to prevent noncompliance 
and new laws to help crack 
down on non-payment. We'll also look at 
how the Service can better support victims 
of domestic or economic abuse, building on 
recommendations from Dr Samantha Callan's 
2023 Independent Review. 

<pb/>
24 

<pb/>
Our plan to give 
young people the 
opportunities and 
skills they need 


<pb/>
Education is the closest thing we 
have to a silver bullet, which is why 
since 2010 we have focused on 
driving up standards in education. 
English children are now the best 
readers in the Western world and 
are 11th in the world for maths, up 
from 27th when Labour left office in 
2010. Children in England now far 
outperform their peers in Labourrun 
Wales and SNP-run Scotland. 
We will build on this success to 
make sure every child gets a world-
class education and reaches their 
full potential. 
Giving every child thechance to go to a greatschool 

Today, 90% of schools are Good or 
Outstanding, up from 68% in 2010. School 
funding is at its highest ever level in real terms 
per pupil and there are record numbers of 
teachers, 27,000 more than 2010. The pupil 
premium, introduced by the Conservatives in 
2011, will allocate almost &pound;3 billion next year to 
support disadvantaged children to reach their 
full potential. Free school meals have been 
extended to more groups of children than 
under any other government over the past 
half a century. We will build on this progress in 
the next Parliament by protecting day-to-day 
schools spending in real terms per pupil. 

None of this progress has been possible 
without our great teachers. We have hit our 
2019 manifesto commitment to introduce 
starting salaries of &pound;30,000 and are backing 
headteachers to manage behaviour and 
enforce discipline. We will require schools to 
follow our guidance on banning the use of 
mobile phones during the school day, which 

is proven to boost attainment, reduce bullying 
and support good behaviour in schools. We will 
attract more talented teachers by expanding 
our recruitment and retention premium and 
reducing workload. From this September, new 
teachers in priority areas and key STEM and 
technical subjects will receive bonuses of up 
to &pound;30,000 tax-free over five years. We will 
extend the payments to eligible teachers in 
our further education colleges. We will always 
support and celebrate our further education 
colleges. 

We will champion excellence in our classrooms. 
In primary schools, we will support teachers 
to use tried and tested techniques, including 
our world-leading phonics programme and our 
mastery approach to maths, enabling every 
child to master the basics before they start 
secondary school. We will support children in 
their transition to secondary school and ensure 
they continue to receive a broad and enriched 
education during and after-school, including via 
our multi-million pound Music Hubs. 

We will mandate two hours of PE every week 
in primary and secondary schools, supported 
by extending the PE and Sport Premium to 
secondary schools. We will increase funding 
for School Games Organisers to get more 
competitive sport into and between schools 
and work with sporting bodies to create more 
UK-wide school competitions like National 
Finals, to identify the best sporting talents. 

To keep pace with our global competitors we 
will introduce the Advanced British Standard, 
a new approach to 16-19 education which will 
build on the best of A Levels and T Levels. 
We will end the artificial and damaging divide 
between academic and technical education 
which has persisted for far too long. Every 
young person will spend more time in the 
classroom, learning more subjects, including 
English and maths to 18, as they do in most 
advanced economies around the world. 

For children and young people to benefit from 
the bold reforms we have made to education, 
they must be in school. The legacy of Covid 


<pb/>
has made this more difficult. We will continue 
to work with schools and local authorities to 
improve school attendance, including through 
more mental health support, building on our 
plan that is working - there were 440,000 
fewer children persistently absent last year 
compared to the year before. And to ensure all 
children are getting a high-quality education, 
including those who are home schooled, we 
will legislate to create a register of children 
not in school. 

We will work to strengthen the relationship 
between schools and parents, including by 
delivering new legislation which will make clear, 
beyond all doubt, that parents have a right to 
see what their child is being taught in school 

and schools must share all materials, especially 
on sensitive matters like relationships and sex 
education. This builds on the progress we have 
already made, having updated Relationships, 
Sex and Health Education Guidance to 
introduce clear age-limits on what children 
can be taught and guarantee the contested 

A new model of modern 
National Service 

We will reinvent National Service for this century to 
give young people valuable life skills and build a stronger 
national culture. National Service will be compulsory, so it 
becomes a rite of passage for every 18-year-old, but young 
people will be given a choice, between: 

&bullet; 
civic service. The equivalent of one weekend a month 
(25 days a year) volunteering in the community, 
alongside work or study, for a year. Roles could include 
special constable, NHS responder or RNLI volunteer; or 

&bullet; 
military service. A year-long full-time placement in the 
armed forces or cyber defence. This placement will be 
competitive and paid, so our armed forces recruit and 
train the brightest and the best. 

We 
will 
establish 
a 
Royal 
Commission, 
the 
first 
in 
a 
quarter 


of a century, to design our modernised National Service. It 

will 
be 
backed 
by 
funding 
rising 
to 
&pound;2.5 
billion 
in 
the 
final 


year of the Parliament and a new National Service Act. 

concept of gender identity is not taught to 
children. 

We will expand strong academy trusts. This 
builds on our record to date, where half of all 
state-funded schools are now academies and 
over 700 free schools have been delivered, 
with more in the pipeline. We will further 
protect parents' choice on where to send their 
child to school, including preserving the rights 
of independent and grammar schools. We will 
lift the cap on faith schools, allowing them to 
offer more places to children based on faith 
and encouraging them to expand. We will back 
Ofsted to provide clear judgements to parents 
on the quality and safety of schools. We are 
rebuilding over 500 schools through the School 
Rebuilding Programme, including rebuilding 
or refurbishing every school identified to have 
RAAC. 

We will transform education for children 
with special educational needs, ending the 
postcode lottery of support by delivering 

60,000 more school places and a further 15 
new free schools for children with special 
educational needs. Instead of penalising 
independent special schools by taxing them, 
we will back them because we believe in the 
right of parents to choose the best education 
for their child. 

Facilitating training andskills at every stage of life 

We believe in giving young people the 
best possible start to their adult lives and 
going to university is not the only route to 
success. The Conservatives have prioritised 
apprenticeships after they were neglected 
under Labour. Since 2010, we have delivered 

5.8 million apprenticeships and have created 
apprenticeship routes into 70% of occupations, 
including through degree apprenticeships. 
We passed new laws requiring children to be 
taught about technical education opportunities, 
not just university routes, and have set up 21 
Institutes of Technology. We will build on this 
by creating 100,000 more apprenticeships 
<pb/>
in England every year by the end of next 
Parliament. 

We will fund this by changing the law to close 
university courses in England with the worst 
outcomes for their students. Courses that 
have excessive drop-out rates or leave students 
worse off than had they not gone to university 
will be prevented from recruiting students 
by the universities regulator. This will protect 
students from being missold and the taxpayer 
from having to pay where the graduate can't. 

We are committed to delivering the best value 
for students, so have already reformed student 
loans to make them fairer, meaning no one will 
pay back more than what they borrowed in real 
terms. And we will work with universities to 
ensure students get the contact hours they are 
promised and their exams get marked. 

We will support the National Citizen Service 
to help young people build confidence and 
develop the skills they need to thrive. 

We will deliver the Lifelong Learning 
Entitlement, giving adults the support they 
need to train, retrain and upskill flexibly 
throughout their working lives. From the 2025 
academic year, adults will be able to apply 
for loans to cover new qualifications. We 
will also continue to expand our adult skills 
programmes, such as Skills Bootcamps which 
meet skills shortages. 


<pb/>
The world is an increasingly 
dangerous place so we will take 
bold action to keep the British 
people safe and our homeland 
secure. Our prosperity depends on 
our ability to preserve international 
security. As our record proves, 
we will do so by deterring our 
adversaries and acting as a force 
for peace and stability in the world. 
We will fully deliver our new pledge for the 
defence of the nation. 

We will hit 2.5% of GDP on defence in 2030 
with our fully funded plan. This is the biggest 
strengthening of our defence since the Cold 
War, ensuring we remain the largest defence 
power in Europe. It will protect our security, 
cement our UK leadership in NATO and create 
more jobs in the UK. 

If all NATO partners spent 2.5% of GDP on 
defence, our collective spending would 
increase by over &pound;140 billion. Therefore, we will 
launch a campaign to set a new baseline of 
2.5% for all NATO allies by 2030. 

We will invest in the vital capabilities of the 
future, to give our Armed Forces the best 
equipment to do their job. 

Taking pride in our record 

&bullet; 
We have led the world in support of 
Ukraine against Putin's aggression, as the 
first European country to mobilise lethal 
aid and to send Western tanks and long-
range missiles. Russia's attempts to destroy 
Ukraine are an assault on European 
security. 

&bullet; 
We will always be steadfast in our support 
for our Trident nuclear deterrent and have 
invested in its modernisation, including a 
nuclear skills package worth up to &pound;763 
million by 2030. 

&bullet; 
We have taken action to prevent Iran and 
its proxies from attacking the UK and its 
partners. 

&bullet; 
We have toughened our cyber defences 
and national security laws to protect the 
nation from terrorists and hostile state 
actors. 

&bullet; 
We have chased dirty money out of the 
UK with new measures to protect our 
economic security. 

&bullet; 
We have ripped out Huawei from key 
parts of our telecommunications system 
and reduced Chinese influence in our 
critical national infrastructure and sensitive 
technological sectors. 

&bullet; 
Due to our post-Brexit freedoms, we have 
introduced a new independent sanctions 
regime that we have used to stand up for 
human rights around the world in countries 
such as Russia, Belarus and Iran. 

&bullet; 
We have agreed new trade and security 
deals across the world including in Europe, 
the Middle East, Africa and the Indo-Pacific. 

&bullet; 
We have delivered major new investment. 
The Integrated Review was supported by 
an additional &pound;24 billion and the Integrated 
Review Refresh by an additional &pound;5 billion 
to invest in stockpiles and our nuclear 
enterprise. We have pledged over &pound;12 
billion to date on support to Ukraine. 

&bullet; 
We have created new defence industrial 
partnerships, including AUKUS to create 
the world's most advanced nuclear-
powered, conventionally and continually 
armed, submarines and the Global Combat 
Air Programme to create a new fighter jet 
with Italy and Japan. 

&bullet; 
We will always stand up for British values 
and interests and will never be afraid to act 
when it is necessary. We have been part of 
a coalition that protected maritime security 
from Houthi attacks and helped police the 
airspace of our partners in the Middle East. 


<pb/>
Our strategic defencepriorities 

We will adapt to the lessons from the war 
in Ukraine which showed us it is vital to be 
able to replenish equipment quickly and that 
the acceleration of disruptive technologies 
is changing the character of warfare. Our 
strategic priorities will be: 

Our pledge to Veterans 

We 
are 
proud 
to 
have 
created 
the 
United 
Kingdom's 
first 
Office 
for 
Veterans 
Affairs, 
run 
by 
a 
dedicated 
Minister 


who attends Cabinet, transforming what it feels like to be a 

Veteran 
in 
the 
United 
Kingdom. 


&bullet; 
We 
will 
maintain 
the 
Office 
for 
Veterans 
Affairs 
in 
its 
current 
position 
in 
the 
Cabinet 
Office, 
with 
a 
dedicated 

Minister for Veterans Affairs in Cabinet. 

&bullet; 
We will maintain the base operating budget of the 

Office for Veterans Affairs at &pound;10 million throughout 

the next Parliament. We will retain the National 
Insurance holiday for those who employ veterans and 
we will bring forward measures so that War Pensions 
and Armed Forces Compensation Scheme awards are 

not 
counted 
as 
income 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
benefits 
and 


pensions. 

&bullet; 
We will extend the visa fees waiver introduced to 
cover Commonwealth personnel, to include their 

direct 
dependants. 
We 
will 
fully 
implement 
the 
findings 


of 
the 
independent 
review 
into 
Veterans 
UK. 
We 
will 


bring forward measures to ensure public bodies record 

whether someone has served in the UK's Armed Forces. 

&bullet; 
We will cut the cost of the Veterans Railcard so that it 
costs the same as the HM Forces Railcard. 

&bullet; 
We will pass the UK's first ever Veterans' Bill to 

enshrine 
Veterans' 
rights 
in 
law. 
Ensuring 
qualifications 


from Service are correctly recognised in civilian life, 

creating a legal duty on government to look after our 

Veterans 
and 
widening 
the 
scope 
of 
the 
Armed 
Forces 


Covenant in law to include the UK Government and 

devolved administrations. 

&bullet; 
We will change the law to ensure Veterans ID cards are 
valid identification in all future elections. 


&bullet; 
Boosting the UK defence industrial base 

by giving industry the multi-year certainty 
it requires to produce the equipment 
we need when we need it, with at least 
&pound;10 billion of investment in munitions 
production, the majority of which will be 
spent in the UK over the next decade. We 
will do this in the areas in which we have 
the most pressing priorities, building on UK 
expertise. We will build long-term strategic 
partnerships with our industrial partners 
and invest in high quality British defence 
industry jobs across the UK. 

&bullet; 
Accelerating the modernisation of our 
Armed Forces and investing in technology 

that is advantageous on the modern 
battlefield. Through our new Defence 
Innovation Agency, we will scale R&D 
funding to a minimum of 5% of the defence 
budget, together with an additional 2% to 
exploit that R&D, accelerating investments 
in new weapon systems. 

&bullet; 
Guaranteeing Ukraine the support it 
needs for the long haul, assuring current 
levels of support for as long as they are 
required. We will secure additional military 
supplies for Ukraine and build international 
agreement to use immobilised Russian 
assets to support Ukraine. 

We will deliver a National Defence and 
Resilience Plan for our security, preparedness 
and resilience as a nation. This will be based 
on the latest assessment of threats and risks, 
bringing together defence and civilian planning 
to reflect our increasingly interdependent 
world, and sit alongside work to build on 
learnings from Covid to improve the country's 
preparedness for risks on the National Risk 
Register. 

We will improve Service Family 
Accommodation, improving quality and 
ensuring military families get the support they 
deserve. 

<pb/>
Improving efficiency andinvesting across the UnitedKingdom 

Defence already contributes significantly to our 
economic prosperity, supporting over 400,000 
jobs in the UK. As part of our new investment 
in defence, we will prioritise growth in UK 
industries and supporting communities 
across the United Kingdom. 

We will make sure new investment is spent 
more effectively than before. By delivering our 
new Integrated Procurement Model, we will 
make defence procurement faster, smarter and 
more joined up, boost private sector investment 
by confirming that ESG considerations are 
entirely consistent with investment in our vital 
defence industry and transform innovation. 

We will ensure we achieve value for money 
from this investment in defence alongside 
our procurement reforms. We will improve 
productivity, along with a new target to 
become the largest defence exporter in 
Europe by 2030. 

Leadership in the world 

Since the 2019 election, the Conservative 
Government has delivered on our promise to 
make Britain a force for good in the world. 

We are proud of our record in defence and 
diplomacy in an increasingly contested 
and dangerous world and we celebrate 
the professionalism of our Armed Forces, 
diplomats, development experts and 
intelligence agencies. 

Our highest priority remains protecting the 
British homeland, Crown dependencies and 
Overseas Territories from risks and threats. 
As part of that, we continue to ensure the 
democratic rights of people in Gibraltar, the 
Falklands and all our Overseas Territories are 
protected. 

We believe that the United Kingdom needs 
to be outward-looking and global in 
perspective, seizing opportunities to deepen 
its economic ties and bolster its prosperity in 
the most dynamic parts of the world. 

We have a record in standing up to those who 
threaten our security and values, and we are 
taking new action to protect ourselves, our 
democracy and our economy at home. 

We must be prepared to tackle the axis of 
authoritarian states and hostile actors who 
are working together to threaten international 
security. That is why we will include Russia, 
Iran and China within the enhanced tier of the 
Foreign Influence Registration Scheme. 

&bullet; 
We will strengthen our relationships with 
like-minded partners around the world. As 
a permanent member of the UN Security 
Council, the UK has a responsibility to 
stand up for international peace and 
security. We will keep investing in our 
collective security through groups like the 
G7, Five Eyes and NATO. 

&bullet; 
We will maintain our special relationship 
with the United States, building on the 
closer trading and national security ties we 
have built in recent years. 

&bullet; 
We will seek to strengthen the 
Commonwealth, as an organisation 
that accounts for over a quarter of the 
membership of the UN and a champion of 
values. We will deepen cooperation with 
Commonwealth partners and institutions 
to enhance the benefits of membership, 
strengthen intra-Commonwealth trade, 
support members facing challenges 
in attracting inward investment and 
strengthen the resilience of the most 
vulnerable members to climate change, 
nature loss and environmental degradation. 

&bullet; 
We will build on our post-Brexit 
relationships in Europe, including through 
the Joint Expeditionary Force and new 


<pb/>
defensive treaties with Germany and 
Poland, to match the treaty we have with 
France under Lancaster House. 

&bullet; 
In relation to China, we will strengthen our 
national security protections, align and 
cooperate with our partners, and engage 
where it is consistent with our interests. 
China has disregarded universal human 
rights and its international commitments, 
from Tibet and Xinjiang to Hong Kong. We 
will continue to raise our grave concerns 
at the UN and other fora and use asset 
freezes and travel bans on those involved 
under our human rights sanctions regime. 

&bullet; 
We will maintain our close ties in the Indo-
Pacific, following our accession to CPTPP, 
our AUKUS partnership with Australia and 
ASEAN dialogue partner status. We will 
bolster the Hiroshima Accord with Japan 
and expand trade and security ties with 
South Korea, Indonesia, Vietnam and 
Singapore. We will finalise a free trade 
agreement with India, alongside a deeper 
strategic partnership on technology and 
defence. 

&bullet; 
We will continue to seek closer ties with 
partners in the Gulf and Middle East based 
on an appreciation of regional perspectives 
and shared interests. 

&bullet; 
We will sign partnership agreements with 
each of the British Overseas Territories, 
ensuring we are working together to 
deliver for their residents and identifying 
areas for greater cooperation on defence, 
trade and investment. 

To ensure our world-class diplomacy and 
development expertise is brought together we 
will maintain the merger of the Foreign Office 
and former Department for International 
Development - and use this advantage to the 
maximum benefit in every post overseas. 

The UK will remain one of the largest 
development donors in the world. We will 
return to spending 0.7% of GNI when fiscal 
circumstances allow. We will assess every 
penny of this money with a strict national 
interest test. 

&bullet; 
We will continue to ensure that aid and 
development supports our strategic 
objectives, with a focus on fragile states. 
We will work with our partners to deliver 
the Sustainable Development Goals 
and tackle poverty, as set out in the 
International Development White Paper. 

&bullet; 
We will use our influence to ensure 
Multilateral Development Banks get more 
money to the countries who need it and 
work to deliver debt relief. 

&bullet; 
We will expand our international campaigns 
on girls' education, women's rights and 
reproductive health. We will stand up for 
those persecuted for their faith and put the 
existing role of Special Envoy for Freedom 
of Religion or Belief on a statutory 
footing. We will promote international 
media freedom and work to end human 
trafficking and modern slavery. 

&bullet; 
We will support marginalised communities 
in the developing world and protect those 
persecuted for their ethnicity, political 
views, faith or sexuality. We will continue 
our campaigns against child marriage and 
FGM. 

&bullet; 
We will scale up high impact, cost effective 
global health interventions, including 
maternal nutrition and antimicrobial 
resistance, for benefit at home and overseas. 
We will continue our longstanding support 
for GAVI and the Global Fund - organisations 
that have saved millions of lives in the fight 
against disease. 

We will maintain the leadership on climate 
change we achieved at COP26 and our efforts 
to tackle global warming and biodiversity loss. 

<pb/>
We will continue to ring-fence our commitment 
to International Climate Finance. 

We will work with Small Island Development 
States, including our Commonwealth friends 
in the Caribbean and the Pacific, to access 
finance for climate change adaptation and 
resilience. 

We will be confident in spreading British values 
around the world, publishing a new Soft Power 
Strategy to support the role of our embassies 
and the British Council overseas. We will 
support the BBC World Service, expand the 
use of the English language worldwide and 
champion English learning around the globe. 

We will not apologise for standing up for our 
values and we will work against the global 
rollback on people's rights and freedoms. We 
will use all the tools available to us, including 
travel bans and sanctions, on individuals and 
entities that warrant it. 

We have delivered on our manifesto pledge to 
introduce 'votes for life' for British citizens living 
overseas. We will appoint a Minister for British 
Citizens Overseas to represent them across 
government. 

The UK has a strong record of providing 
world-leading consular support to our citizens 
overseas and we will ensure British nationals 
abroad get help when they need it. We will 
introduce a new model for complex detention 
cases, with new Family Advocates to help 
provide specialist assistance and give greater 
confidence to families. 

We are proud to be a problem-solving 
and burden-sharing nation. We will use 
our diplomatic efforts to keep pushing for 
reconciliation and stability in parts of the world 
where there is conflict or unresolved territorial 
disputes. 

We staunchly stand behind Israel's right to 
defend itself and to live with security. We will 
continue to support access to aid for those 
affected by the conflict. We will push for a 

two-state solution in the Middle East - our 
long-standing position has been that we will 
recognise a Palestinian State at a time that is 
most conducive to the peace process. We will 
redouble our efforts to help achieve diplomatic 
breakthroughs in Cyprus, Sri Lanka, Sudan and 
Myanmar. 

We will bring back our Bill to ban public bodies 
from imposing their own boycott or divestment 
campaigns against foreign countries and 
territories. 

We will intensify our fight to stop money 
laundering and dirty money and ensure 
all British Overseas Territories and Crown 
Dependencies adopt open registers of 
beneficial ownership. 


<pb/>
Illegal migration is unfair. It 
is unfair for people to jump the 
queue in front of people who 
play by the rules. It is unfair 
for taxpayers to pay for the 
hotels and public services. And 
it is unfair for illegal migrants 
themselves who risk their lives in 
the hands of people smugglers. 
The Conservatives are the only party with a plan 
to stop the boats and reduce the strain that illegal 
migration places on our communities and public 
services. Labour have no plan and would grant an 
amnesty to thousands of illegal migrants. 

We have made progress. Last year, small boat 
arrivals to the UK fell by a third. Our work with 
international partners prevented more than 
26,000 crossings last year. Our Albania deal 
shows that deterrence works, with numbers 
down 90%. 

But the only way to stop the boats entirely is 
to remove the incentive to come - by making 
clear that if you come here illegally, you will not 
be allowed to stay. Only then will the boats stop 
coming and people stop dying in the Channel. 
We will: 

&bullet; 
Establish a deterrent. We will run 
a relentless, continual process of 
permanently removing illegal migrants to 
Rwanda with a regular rhythm of flights 
every month, starting this July, until the 
boats are stopped. If we are forced to 
choose between our security and the 
jurisdiction of a foreign court, including the 
ECtHR, we will always choose our security. 

&bullet; 
End the legal merry-go-round. We will stop 
illegal migrants from bringing spurious 
challenges to block their removal by 
bringing our Illegal Migration Act into force 
and clearing the asylum backlog, with all 
claims processed in six months and the use 
of hotels ended. 

&bullet; 
Crack down on organised immigration 
crime, including through the National 
Crime Agency and our intelligence 
services, to disrupt supply chains and 
tackle people smugglers. 

&bullet; 
Reform asylum rules, holding an 
international summit and working with 
other countries to reform international 
laws to make them fit for an age of mass 
migration. We will restrict visa access from 
countries that don't work with us on our 
national priorities, like illegal migration. 

&bullet; 
Return people with no right to be here 
to their own country. We will sign further 
returns deals like the one we have already 
agreed with Albania. 

&bullet; 
With control of our borders, we can do 
more to help refugees fleeing persecution. 
In addition to maintaining visa schemes for 
people fleeing Hong Kong, Ukraine and our 
Afghan settlement schemes, we will give 
parliament control of how many places we 
offer on safe and legal routes to support 
those in genuine need from around the 
world, with a cap based on the capacity of 
local areas. 

Delivering sustainablelevels of high-skilledmigration 

Immigration is too high. We want to attract 
the brightest and best skilled migrants to the 
UK to contribute to our businesses and public 
services. We must bring migration numbers 
down to sustainable levels to reduce the 
impacts on public services and housing and to 
restore public confidence in the system. 

We have already implemented changes which 
mean that 300,000 people who were eligible 
to come the UK last year now couldn't. We 
have: 


<pb/>
&bullet; 
Ended the ability of almost all 
international students and all care 
workers to bring dependants. 

&bullet; 
Scrapped cut-price shortage labour 
from overseas, by abolishing the 20% 
going rate salary discount for shortage 
occupations. 

&bullet; 
Stopped immigration from undercutting 
British workers, by increasing the salary 
threshold for Skilled Worker visas by 48% 
to &pound;38,700. 

&bullet; 
Ensured those sponsoring dependants 
can support them financially, by raising 
the minimum income for family visas to 
&pound;38,700. 

Going forward, we will raise the Skilled Worker 
threshold and Family income requirement 
with inflation automatically to make sure they 
don't undercut UK workers. 

Our plan to cut migration 

We need to control numbers and give the public confidence 
they will come down significantly. 

&bullet; 
We will introduce a binding, legal cap on migration, 
set on work and family visas so public services are 
protected whilst we bring the skills our businesses and 
the NHS needs. 

&bullet; 
Our cap will be set at a level that explicitly takes into 
account the costs and the benefits of migration. 

&bullet; 
The cap will fall every year of the next Parliament and 
cannot be breached. 

&bullet; 
We will give parliament an annual vote on the level of 
the cap so that the British people can have confidence 
that immigration numbers will be controlled. 

&bullet; 
Unlike Labour, we won't allow any form of free 
movement to return. 


We have taken steps to ensure those coming to 
the UK do not place a burden on the NHS, by 
requiring them to pay the Immigration Health 
Surcharge and increasing this to &pound;1,035. We 
will go further, in line with other countries, 
by requiring migrants to undergo a health 
check in advance of travel and increasing their 
Immigration Health Surcharge or requiring them 
to buy health insurance if they are likely to be a 
burden on the NHS. 

We will increase all visa fees and remove the 
student discount to the Immigration Health 
Surcharge to raise more money for public 
services. 

We will continue to attract the brightest and 
best students to study in our world class 
institutions. We will ensure those who come 
here are able to integrate into communities 
and participate in the economy. We want 
to make sure our immigration system is fair 
and will continue delivering the Windrush 
Compensation Scheme. We are committed to 
the EU Settled Status Scheme and the rights it 
has guaranteed for EU citizens. 

<pb/>
38 

<pb/>
Since 2010, we have invested 
more in the NHS than at any other 
point in its history. We will continue 
to increase NHS spending above 
inflation in each year of the next 
Parliament. 
During Covid, we saw the NHS at its finest, with 
extraordinary acts of service and sacrifice from 
health and care professionals. Throughout the 
pandemic, the Conservative Government acted 
to save lives, protect the NHS and deliver a 
world leading vaccine programme. But dealing 
with a once-in-a-generation pandemic put a 
strain on our health and social care system and it 
has taken time to recover. 

Thanks to record funding, we now have 
more doctors and nurses than ever before, 
delivering record numbers of appointments. 
We are committed to accelerating the NHS's 
recovery from the pandemic, delivering safe and 
effective services and ongoing improvements 
in waiting times for primary, elective, cancer and 
emergency care. We will return performance to 
the levels set out in the NHS Constitution by the 
end of the next Parliament. 

We will invest in and modernise the NHS. We 
have taken the long-term decision to train the 
staff the NHS needs, by backing the NHS's first 
ever Long-Term Workforce Plan. By the end of 
the next Parliament, there will be 92,000 more 
nurses and 28,000 more doctors in the NHS 
than in 2023. We are also delivering record 
increases in training places for other clinicians, 
such as midwives and paramedics and we 
are boosting training places for dentists and 
other dental care professionals by 40%. We will 
improve working conditions for all NHS staff. 

We are committed to supporting a high-quality 
and sustainable social care system, building 
on our additional investment of up to &pound;8.6 
billion over the last two years. At the next 
Spending Review, we will give local authorities 
a multi-year funding settlement to support 
social care and will take forward the reforms in 
our 'People at the Heart of Care' White Paper. 

Bringing health and care 

closer to patients 

The NHS Long-Term Workforce Plan will help shift care 
away from hospitals and into local communities. To support 
this, we will: 
&bullet; 
Expand Pharmacy First, including for menopause 
support, contraception and treatment for chest 
infections, freeing up 20 million GP appointments a year. 

&bullet; 
Build or modernise 250 GP surgeries, focused on areas 
of new housing growth. 

&bullet; 
Build 50 more Community Diagnostic Centres, 
including in underserved areas, resulting in an additional 

2.5 million checks a year. 
We will attract and retain a high-quality care 
workforce, make reforms to shape the market 
for older people's housing and support unpaid 
carers. We will implement our planned reforms 
to cap social care costs from October 2025. 

We will invest in more and better facilities, 

continuing to deliver 40 new hospitals by 
2030 and investing proportionately more 
in out-of-hospital services over time. We will 
modernise NHS primary care services and bring 
health and care closer to patients. 

Our Dental Recovery Plan will unlock 2.5 
million more NHS dental appointments, 
through a patient premium to encourage dentists 
to take on new NHS patients. We will make further 
reforms to the dental contract to ensure its future 
sustainability and we will ensure newly qualified 
dentists have to work in the NHS for a number 
of years or pay back their training costs. We will 
promote good oral health through our 'Smile for 
Life' programme. Rural and coastal communities 
will be better served through 'golden hellos' to 
encourage dentists to work in these areas, and 
through new dental vans. 

We will further improve access to NHS services 
across England by training more staff in rural 
and coastal areas. For the first time the NHS 
Constitution will reflect the bespoke healthcare 
needs of rural and coastal communities and the 
need for the NHS to tailor services accordingly. 


<pb/>
We will protect and promote patients' right 
to choose the NHS service that is right for 
them. We will grow opportunities for all types of 
providers - NHS, charity or independent sector to 
offer services free of charge to NHS patients, 
where these meet NHS costs and standards. 
We will extend patients' right to choose to more 
NHS community services over time, including 
diagnostics, talking therapies and other mental 
health services. We will fully roll out Martha's 
Rule, giving patients the right to a second 
opinion. 

We will support our world-leading life sciences 
sector, embracing the opportunities provided 
by Brexit to pursue nimble and agile regulation, 
supported by a well-equipped MHRA. We will 
support research into new treatments, including 
for Parkinson's and motor neurone disease and 

Transforming NHS 
technology and productivity 

We will invest &pound;3.4 billion in new technology to transform 
the NHS for staff and for patients. The NHS Productivity 
Plan will see NHS productivity grow by 1.9% a year from 
2025-26 - unlocking &pound;35 billion of cumulative savings by 
the end of the decade. We will: 

&bullet; 
Make 
the 
NHS 
App 
the 
single 
front 
door 
for 
NHS 


services. Patients will use the App to access their medical 
records, order prescriptions, book vaccine appointments, 
access a digital red book and manage their hospital 
appointments. 

&bullet; 
Use AI to free up doctors' and nurses' time for frontline 
patient care. 

&bullet; 
Replace tens of thousands of outdated computers, 
slashing the 13 million hours in doctors' and nurses' time 
lost to IT issues every year and digitise NHS processes 
through the Federated Data Platform. 

&bullet; 
Fund 
technology 
to 
help 
clinicians 
read 
MRI 
and 
CT 


scans more quickly and accurately, speeding up results 

for 130,000 patients every year. 

&bullet; 
Create new incentives for improved performance, 
rewarding the best performing providers of care. 

secure more commercial clinical trials. We will 
remove bureaucratic obstacles to the use of new 
medicines, such as the NHS Budget Impact Test 
and will align NHS England's cost-effectiveness 
thresholds for new medicines indications with 
those used by NICE. We will implement a 
new medtech pathway so that cost-effective 
medtech, including AI, is rapidly adopted 
throughout the NHS. 

We will cut waste and bureaucracy in the 
NHS, reducing the number of managers 
by 5,500, releasing &pound;550 million for frontline 
services and simplifying and streamlining 
oversight and accountability. We will carefully 
consider the implications of the review of the 
whistleblowing framework for the NHS and 
we will consult on a disbarring regime for NHS 
managers. 

We know that, for most people, poor health 
comes from living with one or more of six 
major health conditions: cancer, heart disease, 
musculoskeletal disorders, mental ill-health, 
dementia and respiratory disease. We will publish 
and implement a Major Conditions Strategy 
to prevent these conditions from occurring 
and ensure those living with them receive the 
best possible care. We will also take forward our 
Rare Diseases Action Plan. We will continue to 
modernise autism and learning disability services. 

We will bring forward our landmark Tobacco 
and Vapes Bill in our first King's Speech. We will 
continue to tackle childhood and adult obesity 
and will legislate to restrict the advertising of 
products high in fat, salt and sugar. We will 
gather new evidence on the impact of ultra-
processed food to support people to make 
healthier choices. 

We will roll out new digital health checks to 
250,000 more people every year, helping to 
prevent hundreds of strokes and heart attacks. 
We will take forward the NHS Vaccination 
Strategy. 

We are implementing the HIV Action Plan, which 
will end new HIV transmissions by 2030. Subject 
to evaluation, we will expand HIV opt-out testing 
in emergency departments in England. 

<pb/>
We will prioritise women's health, following 
publication of the first ever Women's Health 
Strategy in 2022. To support women further, we 
will: 

&bullet; 
Bring forward a comprehensive 
national strategy for maternity care as 
recommended by the APPG on Birth 
Trauma's inquiry. 

&bullet; 
Deliver additional funding for maternal 
safety and improve access to mental 
health services for new mums, improve 
perinatal pelvic health services to prevent 
and support women with birth injuries 
and postnatal appointments dedicated to 
checking mums, not just their babies. 

&bullet; 
Expand women's health hubs so that every 
integrated care system has at least one hub 
up and running. 

&bullet; 
Roll out fracture liaison services to every 
region, reaching 100% coverage by 2030 
as osteoporosis disproportionately impacts 
women. 

&bullet; 
Support continued research into disparities 
in maternity care through the National 
Institute for Health and Care Research. 

We will complete the implementation of 
the Cass Review, protecting young people 
questioning their gender from ideologically-
driven care and ensuring that NHS services 
follow evidence-based best practice. We have 
already stopped the routine use by the NHS of 
puberty blockers for gender dysphoria and will 
legislate to permanently prevent their private 
prescription and supply. 

We will amend the NHS Constitution so that 
it recognises every patient's right to request 
single-sex accommodation and same-sex 
intimate care. We will not allow the word 
'woman' to be erased by health services. Words 
such as 'breastfeeding' and 'mother' will not be 
replaced by 'chestfeeding' and 'birthing parent'. 

We will introduce a new licensing scheme 
and age limits for non-surgical cosmetic 
procedures, ensuring services are administered 
by suitably qualified and trained professionals. 

Improving mental health 
support 

Mental 
health 
should 
have 
parity 
of 
esteem 
with 
physical 


health. To support children, young people and adults with 
their mental health, we will: 

&bullet; 
Expand 
coverage 
of 
Mental 
Health 
Support 
Teams 
from 


50% to 100% of schools and colleges in England by 2030. 
&bullet; 
Open early support hubs for those aged 11-25 in every 
local community by 2030. 
&bullet; 
Increase the planned expansion of NHS Talking 

Therapies by 50%, supporting people with anxiety, 

stress and depression. 

&bullet; 
Boost the capacity of Individual Placement and Support 
for Severe Mental Illness by 140,000 places. 

&bullet; 
Pass a new law to provide better treatment and support 
for severe mental health needs in the first session of the 
next Parliament. 

We will maintain the position that assisted dying is 
a matter of conscience and will respect the will of 
Parliament. Debates on assisted dying should never 
distract from the importance of delivering high-
quality palliative care services and we will continue 
to support children's and adults' hospices. 

We have made a wholehearted and unequivocal 
apology, on behalf of successive governments 
of all parties, for the infected blood scandal. As 
one of the last acts of Parliament, legislation was 
passed that brings the Infected Blood Compensation 
Authority into existence and we confirmed Sir 
Robert Francis as its Interim Chair. We will pay 
comprehensive compensation to those infected 
and those affected by this scandal, accepting the 
principles recommended by the Inquiry. Whatever 
it costs to deliver the scheme, we will pay it. We 
will also give a further &pound;210,000 interim payment 
to living infected beneficiaries - those registered 
with existing infected blood support schemes as 
well as those who register with a support scheme 
before the final scheme becomes operational and 
the estates of those who pass away between now 
and payments being made. A scandal like this must 
never be allowed to happen again, so we will study 
the Inquiry's wide-ranging recommendations and 
provide a full response to the Inquiry. 


<pb/>
The Conservatives will always 
back our brave police and security 
services with the powers and 
resources needed to keep our 
country safe and we will always 
work to deliver a justice system that 
is fair to victims and sees offenders 
repay their debt to society. 
Under the Conservatives, violent crime has fallen 
by 44% since 2010 and neighbourhood crime 
is down 48%. Reoffending has fallen from over 
30% in 2010 to 25%. We have recruited 20,000 
police officers, delivered 6,000 prison places 
as part of the largest prison expansion since the 
Victorian era and deported over 18,000 foreign 
national offenders since 2019 alone. We will: 

&bullet; 
Give every neighbourhood an additional 
police officer by recruiting 8,000 more 
police officers to patrol communities and 
catch criminals in every ward in the country. 
These full time, fully warranted officers will 
be dedicated to neighbourhood policing. 

&bullet; 
Back the police, by giving officers new 
powers and tools to catch criminals, including 
technology like facial recognition and powers 
to seize knives and track down stolen 
property. We will always back the police in the 
lawful and professional use of force, alongside 
a fair and proportionate accountability system. 

&bullet; 
Restore public trust in policing. We will 
license police officers for specialist roles, 
as we do already for firearms officers. 
We will legislate to ensure officers are 
appropriately vetted during their service 
and those who fail can be sacked. 

We will foster greater collaboration between 
the National Crime Agency and Counter 
Terrorism Policing. 

We will urgently introduce Martyn's Law, 
in tribute to Martyn Hett, who was tragically 
killed alongside 21 others in the Manchester 

Arena terrorist attack in 2017. This will ensure 
premises are better prepared for terrorist 
attacks by requiring them to take proportionate 
steps to mitigate risks. 

We will toughen up community sentencing by 

increasing the use of community payback 
and electronic tagging, so criminals pay their 
debt to society and communities witness justice 
being served. We will fund every police force 
to roll out Hotspot Policing, which has cut 
anti-social behaviour by up to 50% in some 
areas. 

We will keep turning the tide against fraudsters. 
In the last year we have reduced fraud by 13%, 
including through our new National Fraud 
Squad with 400 officers now in post. We will 
ban SIM farms, which are used to send bulk 
messages for fraudulent texts, and ban cold 
calls on financial products so fraudsters cannot 
dupe people into buying fake investments. 

Tackling violence against 
women and girls 

We have made violence against women and 
girls a strategic policing requirement for the 
first time, making clear to the police that these 
crimes are as significant as terrorism, serious 
and organised crime and child sexual abuse. 

We have strengthened the law to punish 
predators with new offences for stalking, 
controlling or coercive behaviour, non-fatal 
strangulation and suffocation, sharing of intimate 
images or 'revenge porn', non-consensual 
taking of images of a woman breastfeeding, 
'up skirting' and raised the maximum penalties 
for harassment. We will legislate to create new 
offences for spiking, the creation of sexualised 
deepfake images and taking intimate images 
without consent. 

We will support victims of domestic abuse 
including through our Domestic Abuse Act, 
which created a statutory definition of domestic 
abuse and gave new powers to police and the 
courts. 


<pb/>
We will toughen sentencing for murders that take 
place within the context of domestic abuse with 
new aggravating factors, such as if they involve 
coercive and controlling behaviour or gratuitous 
attacks. We will introduce a 25-year prison term 
for domestic murders, regardless of whether a 
weapon is used. Those who kill their domestic 
abusers will not face the same starting point. This 
will be accompanied by a review of homicide 
sentencing, looking to close loopholes that 
allow some killers to get off lightly. 

We will introduce an aggravating factor for 
murders that happen in the context of 'rough 
sex', so it is never used as an excuse to get a 
lighter sentence. 

We have increased rape prosecutions by 56% 
since 2010 and we will ensure rape victims get 
the justice and support they deserve, with 
a new investigatory model for rape for police 
forces and prosecutors and pre-recorded cross-
examination for victims in all Crown courts. 

We will carefully consider the recommendations 
of Baroness Bertin's Independent Review of 
Pornography and ensure we have the right 
safeguards in place to protect against any 
harmful impacts of the industry. 

A justice system thatdelivers for victims and the 
public 

We will toughen sentencing for the worst 
offenders. We have already ended Labour's 
automatic halfway release for violent and 
serious sexual offenders. We will make life 
imprisonment without parole mandatory 
for more of the most heinous murderers 
and require rapists and other serious sexual 
offenders to spend the whole of their 
sentences behind bars. 

We will toughen sentences for knife crime, 
grooming gangs and assaults against retail 
workers and combat the ability of serious 
organised crime gangs to use new technology 
to harm the public. We will prioritise further 

measures to crack down on hyper-prolific 
offenders. 

We will empower judges to require offenders 
to attend hearings or face an increased 
sentence. We will stand firmly behind the legal 
doctrine of joint enterprise meaning that those 
who assist in crimes, from the getaway driver to 
the weapon supplier, can be held accountable. 

We will build four new prisons, completing 
our programme of 20,000 new prison places 
by 2030. We will make it easier to build prisons 
in appropriate places by scrapping legacy EU 
rules and streamlining the planning system. 

We will remove more Foreign National 
Offenders by increasing removals under the 
Early Removal Scheme and negotiating more 
Prisoner Transfer Agreements. 

We will maintain the ban on prisoners voting 
from jail. 

We will turn criminals away from the cycle 
of reoffending, investing in rehabilitative 
services such as drug treatment, education and 
employment. We will deliver our ten-year drugs 
plan to cut crime and help people rebuild their 
lives away from crime. 

Our Victims and Prisoners Act ensures victims 
are protected and supported, including that 
those affected by major disasters such as 
Hillsborough, the Manchester Arena bombing 
and the Grenfell Tower fire can get the help 
they need, when they need it, through a 
permanent Independent Public Advocate. 
We will expand the provision of legal aid at 
inquests related to major incidents where the 
Independent Public Advocate is appointed or in 
the aftermath of terrorist incidents. 

We will bring the mandatory reporting 
provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill into force 
as soon as possible. We will design a redress 
scheme for the victims of child sexual abuse in 
institutional settings that reflects their needs. 
We will ensure this includes the victims of 

<pb/>
grooming gangs and make a national apology 
to grooming gang victims. 

We will ensure sex offenders cannot evade 
justice or conceal their identity by restricting 
sex offenders from changing their names. 

We will cut the Covid court backlog by 
keeping open Nightingale courtrooms, funding 
sitting days and investing in court maintenance. 
And we will continue to digitise court processes 
and expand the use of remote hearings. We 
will match fund 100 criminal law pupillages to 
speed up justice for victims and will continue 
to ensure access to justice through legal aid 
provision. 

We will expand our Pathfinder Courts pilot 
in family court proceedings and continue 
mediation vouchers to help more families 
resolve private law child arrangements without 
an acrimonious court battle. 

We will support our world class legal services 
sector, including through an Arbitration Bill. 
We will help individuals and small businesses 
bring cases against wealthier opponents with 
legislation to support third party funding of 
litigation. 

A plan to counter extremism 
and to protect our streets 

In recent months we have seen shocking 
increases in protests being used as a cover for 
extremist disruption and criminality. We cannot 
allow a small and vocal minority to destroy our 
democratic values. That is why we unveiled a 
new extremism definition under which certain 
groups that promote an ideology based on 
violence, hatred or intolerance will be blocked 
from government funding and meeting officials. 

We have passed tough new laws to curb 
disruptive protests. Our Public Order Act 
2023 gave the police new powers to intervene 
where protests cause serious disruption to 
communities, leading to the arrests of over 

600 Just Stop Oil and Extinction Rebellion 
protestors in London alone. We will introduce 
further powers to ban face coverings, 
pyrotechnics and climbing on war memorials. 

We will strengthen police powers to prevent 
protests or marches that pose a risk of 
serious disorder, by allowing police to take 
into account the cumulative impact of protests. 
We will ban protests outside schools to stop 
mobs from intimidating teachers and children. 
We will always support teachers to uphold 
and promote fundamental British values and 
ensure they are protected from accusations of 
blasphemy. 

We will place a duty on the police and 
prosecutors to publish regular guidance on the 
statements, chants or symbols, for example, 
the swastika or the term 'jihad', that in the 
context of political protest may constitute an 
offence. We will explore ways for the police to 
recover some of the costs of policing disruptive 
protests from the groups that organise them. 

We will also ensure our elected 
representatives get the protection needed to 
represent their constituents without fear. 

Abuse or discrimination based on religion is 
unacceptable. We will not tolerate antisemitic 
hatred in any form. We have pledged &pound;54 
million for the Community Security Trust to give 
Jewish schools and synagogues the security 
measures they need and allocated additional 
funding to support schools and universities to 
understand, recognise and tackle antisemitism. 
We will get the UK Holocaust Memorial built. 

We do not tolerate anti-Muslim hatred and 
will seek to stamp it out wherever it occurs. 
We have committed to provide &pound;117 million 
over four years for the Protective Security for 
Mosques scheme and are proud to support and 
help fund Tell MAMA's vital work. 


<pb/>
Our plan for an 

affordable and 

pragmatic transition 
to net zero 


<pb/>
In the last few years, we have 
faced the greatest shock to our 
energy security since the 1970s. 
Putin's illegal invasion of Ukraine 
sent energy prices spiralling. 
Because of the decisions we 
had taken to boost domestic 
energy production and invest 
in renewables, Britain had little 
reliance on Russian fuel when the 
invasion began, unlike some of our 
European neighbours. But when 
global energy prices spiked, the 
Government stepped in to pay 
around half the typical household 
bill at the peak, saving families 
&pound;1,500 on average. Bills are now 
coming down, and in July will fall to 
the lowest level in over two years. 
But the shock has reminded us 
of the importance of securing our 
long-term energy supply. 
We are proud of our record and remain 
committed to delivering net zero by 2050. Today 
the UK is home to the five largest offshore 
wind farms in the world. Half of our electricity 
comes from renewables, compared to just 
7% when Labour were last in office. We have 
reduced emissions further and faster than any 
of our competitors and the UK is the first major 
economy to get halfway to net zero. And we 
have done this while growing our economy 
by 80%, demonstrating to other countries that 
there is a positive economic path to tackling 
climate change. 

Delivering energy security 

We will boost our energy independence in an 
increasingly unstable world. We will legislate 
to ensure annual licensing rounds for oil 
and gas production from our own North Sea 

to provide energy to homes and businesses 
across the country and protect high-skilled and 
well-paid jobs in the industry. 

Labour are committed to shutting down the 
North Sea, rejecting any new licenses. That 
would put 200,000 jobs and billions of pounds 
of tax receipts at risk. It would leave the UK 
more dependent on foreign powers and mean 
higher emissions from imported liquefied gas. 

We introduced a windfall tax on oil and gas 
companies in 2022 to ensure they pay their 
fair share of tax from extraordinary profits while 
prices remain abnormally high. We will keep 
this in place until 2028-29, unless prices fall 
back to normal sooner. In total, this is expected 
to raise over &pound;26 billion. We will maintain the 
investment allowances that provide incentives 
to invest in our North Sea, which Labour have 
said they would remove. 

We will back up renewables and prevent the 
prospect of blackouts with new gas power 
stations to maintain a safe and reliable energy 
source for days when the weather doesn't 
power up renewables. Conservatives know 
that if we are forced to choose between clean 
energy and keeping citizens safe and warm, we 
will choose to keep the lights on. 

We are delivering record investment into 
UK renewables. But we need to go further, 
unlocking more investment to secure our 
energy supply in the future. In the next 
Parliament we will: 

&bullet; 
Treble our offshore wind capacity, to 
deliver low-cost, home-grown energy 
and support the development of vibrant 
industrial clusters in places like the North 
East of England, Scotland and Wales. 

&bullet; 
Build the first two carbon capture and 
storage clusters, based across North 
Wales and, the North West of England and 
Teesside and the Humber, cutting carbon 
and creating tens of thousands of jobs in 
these regions, and progress the second 
tranche of projects in Aberdeenshire and 
the Humber. 


<pb/>
&bullet; 
Invest &pound;1.1 billion into the Green Industries 
Growth Accelerator to support British 
manufacturing capabilities, boost supply 
chains and ensure our energy transition is 
made in Britain. 

&bullet; 
Scale up nuclear power, building on our 
work establishing Great British Nuclear. 
Within the first 100 days of the next 
Parliament, we will approve two new fleets 
of Small Modular Reactors to rapidly 
expand nuclear power, create well-paid, 
high-skilled jobs and deliver cheaper, 
cleaner and more secure energy. We will 

halve the time it takes for new nuclear 
reactors to be approved, by allowing 
regulators to assess projects while designs 
are being finalised, improving join-up with 
overseas regulators assessing the same 
technology and speeding up planning and 
environmental approvals. 

&bullet; 
Deliver a new gigawatt power plant 
at Wylfa in North Wales and work with 
industry to deliver existing projects at 
Hinkley Point and Sizewell. 

This will help the UK to become a net exporter 
of electricity. And by building more electricity 
links with neighbouring countries, we can 
increase exports, make our energy system 
more efficient and bring additional revenue to 
the UK. We will ensure offshore cables help 
reduce the amount of onshore infrastructure, 
such as substations, that we need to build. 

As we achieve this transition to net zero, we 
will take steps to ensure the technology and 
infrastructure is made here in the UK. We will 
provide a bonus, on top of contract payments 
that support offshore wind, to reward energy 
firms that invest in manufacturing in the 
most disadvantaged places in the UK or 
invest in more sustainable supply chains, 
creating more good jobs as we get more 
energy from renewables. 

We are strong supporters of domestic steel 
production and have introduced effective 
safeguards against steel that is heavily 

subsidised by foreign governments and helped 
public projects procure more UK-made steel. 
We agreed a &pound;500 million grant as part of 
a &pound;1.25 billion commitment by Tata Steel to 
transform and secure a sustainable future 
at their Port Talbot works. We will continue 
working to support production in Scunthorpe 
and the North East of England, securing the 
future of steelmaking across the UK. 

We will implement a new import carbon pricing 
mechanism by 2027 to ensure that imports of 
iron, steel, aluminium, ceramics and cement from 
countries with a lower or no carbon price will 
face a comparable carbon price to those goods 
produced in the UK. This will reduce the risk of 
industry being displaced to other countries which 
aren't taking action on climate change. 

A pragmatic andproportionate approach tonet zero 

The UK has led the world on tackling climate 
change, having cut our emissions more than any 
other major economy. We will get to net zero on 
the fairest possible path and in a way that brings 
people with us. 

We will seize the opportunities created by the 
transition, opening up whole new sectors and 
creating hundreds of thousands of good jobs 
in all corners of the country. Our approach 
leverages the innovation and investment of 
the private sector to unleash technologies that 
cut costs for households. This has enabled 
us to overachieve on our targets, become a 
powerhouse in clean technologies, and continue 
to support households. We reject Labour's 
dogmatic, top-down approach that will burden 
households with higher bills. 

We will cut the cost of tackling climate 
change for households and business, and 
deliver net zero by 2050, by: 

&bullet; 
Sticking to our pragmatic, proportionate 
and realistic approach that eases the 
burdens on working people. Ensuring that 

<pb/>
families are given time to make changes 
that affect their lives and never forcing 
people to rip out their existing boiler and 
replace it with a heat pump. 

&bullet; 
Guaranteeing a vote in the next Parliament 
on the next stage of our pathway, with 
adoption of any new target accompanied 
by proper consideration of the plans and 
policies required to meet the target, to 
maintain democratic consent for the big 
decisions that net zero will mean for our 
country. 

&bullet; 
Ensuring that green levies on household 
bills are lower. The cost of renewables 
such as wind and solar has fallen 
dramatically. We will ensure the annual 
policy costs and levies on household 
energy bills are lower in each year of the 
next Parliament than they were in 2023. 

&bullet; 
Reforming the Climate Change Committee, 
giving it an explicit mandate to consider 
cost to households and UK energy security 
in its future climate advice. 

&bullet; 
Ruling out creating further green levies, 
and alongside our commitment not to 
introduce road pricing schemes, we will 
also rule out any frequent flyer levy. 

Energy bills are falling, down 63% since the 
peak. We will take further action to ensure they 
are low as possible for families, by: 

&bullet; 
Maintaining our energy price cap, 
protecting millions of households from 
being overcharged by their supplier. As 
the energy market advances, the price 
cap will need to evolve and we will ensure 
the regulator has the necessary powers to 
continue protecting consumers. 

&bullet; 
Reviewing and reforming standing 
charges to keep them as low as possible. 

&bullet; 
Delivering our Pumpwatch scheme that 
will force petrol retailers to share live 
information on their prices, helping drivers 
to get a fair price at the pump. 

&bullet; 
Introducing more efficient local markets for 
electricity, which expert analysis estimates 
would save &pound;20 - &pound;45 per household per 
year. 

&bullet; 
Giving households the choice of smart 
energy tariffs, which can save them &pound;900 a 
year. 

&bullet; 
Implementing the recommendations of the 
Winser Review, ensuring networks are able 
to buy forward with confidence and cutting 
waiting times to get a grid connection to 
deliver an estimated saving of &pound;15 - &pound;25 per 
household per year out to 2035. 

&bullet; 
Recognising technological developments 
over the last decade, we will undertake 
a rapid review into the advantages of 
alternative network technologies, compared 
to overhead pylons. The review will consider 
moving to a presumption in favour of 
undergrounding where cost competitive. 

Almost half of homes in England are now energy 
efficiency Band C, up from just one in seven in 
2010. We will invest &pound;6 billion in energy efficiency 
over the next three years to make around a 
million homes warmer. And we will fund an 
energy efficiency voucher scheme, open to every 
household in England, to support the installation 
of energy efficiency measures and solar panels, 
helping families lower their bills. 

We will ensure democratic consent for onshore 
wind, striking the right balance between energy 
security and the views of their local communities. 
Our updated National Planning Policy Framework 
seeks to ensure local areas that host onshore 
wind directly benefit, including potentially through 
energy bill discounts. 

We will support solar in the right places, not 
on our best agricultural land. We have changed 
planning rules to protect the best agricultural 
land with a presumption that this is used for food 
production, while also making it easier for solar to 
be located on brownfield sites and on rooftops. 
Our new planning rules also prevent multiple solar 
farms being clustered in one area to help protect 
our rural landscapes. We will retain the current 
moratorium on fracking. 


<pb/>
We will deliver a secure future 
for communities by giving more 
people a better chance of living 
where they would like - near their 
family, friends and job. We have 
delivered over 2.5 million homes 
since 2010, including meeting our 
commitment to deliver one million 
homes in the last Parliament. Home 
ownership rates plummeted under 
the last Labour Government so we 
cannot afford to go back to square 
one. We will deliver 1.6 million 
homes in England in the next 
Parliament by: 
&bullet; 
Abolishing the legacy EU 'nutrient 
neutrality' rules to immediately unlock the 
building of 100,000 new homes with local 
consent, with developers required in law to 
pay a one-off mitigation fee so there is no 
net additional pollution. 

&bullet; 
Delivering a record number of homes 
each year on brownfield land in urban 
areas. We will do this by providing a fast-
track route through the planning system 
for new homes on previously developed 
land in the 20 largest cities. Strong design 
codes will ensure this enables the gentle 
densification of urban areas, with new 
family homes and mansion-blocks on tree-
lined streets built in the local character. We 
will look at extending 'full expensing' to the 
delivery of brownfield housing. 

&bullet; 
Raising density levels in inner London to 
those of European cities like Paris and 
Barcelona. We will ensure the London 
Plan delivers more family homes a year, 
forcing the Mayor to plan for more homes 
on brownfield sites, like underused 
industrial land. We will regenerate major 
sites like Euston, Old Oak Common and 
Thamesmead. 

&bullet; 
Unlocking new urban regeneration 
schemes, by creating locally-led urban 
development corporations in partnership 
with the private sector and institutional 
investors. We will support the delivery of 
new quarters in Leeds, Liverpool and York 
alongside working with local leaders and 
the community to seize the opportunity of 
our ambitious Cambridge 2050 plan. 

&bullet; 
Supporting local and smaller builders 
by requiring councils to set land aside 
for them and lifting Section 106 burdens 
on more smaller sites, while ruling out 
Labour's proposed 'community right to 
appeal' which would bring the planning 
system to its knees. 

&bullet; 
Making sure local authorities use the 
new Infrastructure Levy to deliver the 
GP surgeries, roads and other local 
infrastructure needed to support homes. 
We will not allow these funds to be spent 
on community projects that bear no 
relation to support for new homes. 

&bullet; 
Renewing the Affordable Homes 
Programme that will deliver homes of all 
tenures and focus on regenerating and 
improving housing estates. 

&bullet; 
Retaining our cast-iron commitment to 
protect the Green Belt from uncontrolled 
development, while ensuring more homes 
get built where it makes sense, like in inner 
cities. Our national planning protections 
mean there is never any top-down 
requirement for councils to remove Green 
Belt protection and these will remain in 
place. 


<pb/>
A plan to support first-timebuyers onto the housingladder and ensure fairness 
in our housing system 

As well as building the homes we need, we 
will also take immediate steps to support more 
people onto the housing ladder. We will ensure 
the majority of first-time buyers pay no Stamp 
Duty at all, lowering the upfront costs of buying 
a first home. We will make permanent the 
increase to the threshold at which first-time 
buyers pay Stamp Duty to &pound;425,000 from 
&pound;300,000, which we introduced in 2022. We 
will also launch a new and improved Help to 
Buy scheme to provide first-time buyers with 
an equity loan of up to 20% towards the cost 
of a new build home. First-time buyers will be 
able to get onto the housing ladder with a 5% 
deposit on interest terms they can afford. The 
scheme will be part funded by contributions 
from house builders. We will also continue 
our Mortgage Guarantee Scheme, which has 
already helped over 40,000 households buy 
a home, while supporting more families to buy 
through shared ownership. 

We will always prioritise giving those who work 
hard and contribute to our country a leg up in 
the housing market. We will legislate for new 
'Local Connection' and 'UK Connection' 
tests for social housing in England, to ensure 
this valuable but limited resource is allocated 
fairly. And we will implement a 'three strikes 
and you're out' expectation of social housing 
landlords for anti-social behaviour. They will be 
expected to evict tenants whose behaviour 
is disruptive to neighbours and the local 
community. 

We will protect family homes from higher tax. 
Under the Family Home Tax Guarantee, we 
will not increase the number of council tax 
bands, undertake an expensive council tax 
revaluation or cut council tax discounts, as 
Labour is currently doing in Wales. We will 
maintain Private Residence Relief so that 
people's homes are protected from Capital 
Gains Tax and we will not increase the rate or 
level of Stamp Duty to support homeowners. 

To further support homeowners, we will 
introduce a two-year temporary Capital 
Gains Tax relief for landlords who sell to 
their existing tenants. We rule out Labour's 
anti-aspiration move to drastically reduce Right 
to Buy discounts to levels seen under the last 
Labour Government. We will protect the laws 
that ensure the discounts rise with inflation and 
fight any plan by local authorities to abolish the 
Right to Buy altogether. 

We will complete the process of leasehold 
reform, to improve the lives of over four 
million leaseholders. We will cap ground 
rents at &pound;250, reducing them to peppercorn 
over time. We will end the misuse of forfeiture 
so leaseholders don't lose their property and 
capital unfairly and make it easier to take up 
commonhold. 

We will pass a Renters Reform Bill that will 
deliver fairness in the rental market for 
landlords and renters alike. We will deliver the 
court reforms necessary to fully abolish Section 
21 and strengthen other grounds for landlords 
to evict private tenants guilty of anti-social 
behaviour. 

We will continue with our plans to end rough 
sleeping and prevent people from ending up 
on the streets in the first place, after making 
significant progress over the last few years. We 
will deliver our commitments under the Local 
Authority Housing Fund and review the quality 
of temporary accommodation. 

After delivering landmark new laws that freed 
leaseholders from cladding bills following on 
from the awful tragedy of Grenfell Tower, we 
will continue our support for leaseholders 
affected by historic building safety problems 

by requiring the continuation of developer-
funded remediation programmes for mid- and 
high-rise buildings. 

We will ensure councils have the powers they 
need to manage the uncontrolled growth of 
holiday lets, which can cause nuisance to local 
residents and a hollowing out of communities. 

<pb/>
We will support those who want to build or 
commission their own home by making the 
planning process simpler, while also supporting 
more community housing schemes. We will 
encourage the building of different forms of 
housing, particularly housing for older people. 

Building on our new powers for the police, we 
will further speed up the use and enforcement 
of powers to remove illegal traveller sites, 
while giving councils greater planning powers 
to prevent unauthorised development by 
travellers. 


<pb/>
Our commitment to levelling 
up means giving everyone the 
opportunity to stay local and go 
far. Conservatives are committed 
to delivering stronger communities 
and safer streets, unleashing the 
power of the private sector to 
unlock jobs and opportunity for 
all and boosting local pride. We 
have already allocated and will 
ensure we deliver over &pound;15 billion 
in dedicated levelling up funding 
across the UK since 2019 and 
passed our landmark Levelling 
Up and Regeneration Act. We 
have saved more than 330 pubs, 
sports clubs, arts venues and 
other precious community spaces 
through our Community Ownership 
Fund and we have unlocked the 
promise of thousands of jobs with 
12 Freeports. To further strengthen 
communities, we will: 
&bullet; 
Provide 105 towns in the UK with a &pound;20 
million endowment fund for local people to 
change their town's future. This includes 
extending our plan to 30 more towns who 
will benefit from funding that they can use 
on their priorities such as reviving high 
streets or bringing new housing to town 
centres. 

&bullet; 
Extend our Community Ownership Fund to 
help more communities across the UK take 
control of vital community assets like pubs, 
music venues, libraries, green spaces, 
leisure centres and more. 

&bullet; 
Extend the UK Shared Prosperity Fund for 
three years at the next Spending Review, 
before using this funding to support UK-
wide National Service. Both schemes will 

involve funding community groups focused 
on increasing life chances, instilling civic 
pride and boosting people's skills. 

&bullet; 
Create more Freeports and Business 
Rates Retention zones. Freeports have 
already generated just under &pound;3 billion 
in investment, which in turn will create 
thousands of jobs. We will extend this 
opportunity to more areas and set out an 
application round in the next Parliament. 
We want to replicate the example of 
Sunderland's Crown Works Studios 
elsewhere in the country. We will enable 
councils to retain all business rates growth 
within a defined zone for 25 years, which 
they can use to finance the delivery of new 
infrastructure and invest in supporting 
burgeoning local industries. 

&bullet; 
Continue backing Investment Zones across 
the country, giving areas &pound;160 million to 
catalyse local growth and investment. 

&bullet; 
Give our high streets a new lease of 
life and restore pride in place. We will 
change planning laws to support places 
to bring back local market days and 
regenerate defunct shopping centres. 
We will continue to make industry pay for 
removing chewing-gum from streets and 
raise the fines utility firms must pay when 
they create 'street scars' by not properly 
restoring roads and pavements after their 
works are completed. We will make fly 
tipping an offence that carries penalty 
points against your driving licence. 

&bullet; 
Empower communities through devolution 
and new powers. By 2030, every part 
of England that wants one will have a 
devolution deal. We will offer our 'level 4' 
devolution powers to areas in England with 
a devolution deal and a directly elected 
leader, starting with the Tees Valley. 

&bullet; 
Launch a Seaside Heritage Fund to support 
enhancements to our seaside heritage, 
preserving and restoring our coastal assets. 


<pb/>
We will ensure councils provide high quality 
and value for money services to local 
communities. As part of this, we will protect 
residents from excessive council tax rises by 
ensuring that local people have the final say 
on council tax; and we will ban the 'four-day 
working week' in local authorities. We will 
improve standards in councils by making their 
performance more transparent through the 
Office for Local Government. We will always 
stand behind councils and look to recognise 
the unique circumstances of coastal areas 
in the allocation of grant funding to local 
authorities, alongside providing fairer funding 
for rural areas through the Rural Services 
Delivery Grant. 

Backing drivers 


In our first King's Speech, we will go even further and 
introduce a Backing Drivers Bill that will: 

&bullet; 
Stop road pricing. A Conservative Government will not 

introduce 
pay 
per 
mile 
road 
pricing 
and 
will 
ban 
Mayors 


and local councils from doing so. 

&bullet; 
Reverse Labour's unfair ULEZ expansion in London. 
Sadiq Khan's ULEZ tax rise only has a 'moderate' or 
'minor' effect on pollution. The expansion impacts 
thousands of people living around London who had no 
say in his election and can now no longer afford to get to 
hospital appointments or where they work or study. We 
will reverse it. 

&bullet; 
Rule out top-down blanket Low Traffic 
Neighbourhoods and 20mph zones. While 20mph 
zones can help improve road safety in residential areas or 
outside schools, misuse undermines public trust and risks 
congestion and pollution. We are clear they must only be 
considered on a road-by-road basis and with the support 
of people who live there. We will require any new schemes 
to be put to a referendum and introduce a 'right to 
challenge' existing Low Traffic Neighbourhoods and 

20mph schemes. 



A plan to support the journeyspeople make every day 

Reliable transport links are critical for thriving 
local communities. The &pound;36 billion of savings 
from HS2 will transform local and regional 
transport, benefitting more people, in more 
places, more quickly. But we will also take 
immediate steps to help people now. Buses 
are overwhelmingly the most popular form of 
public transport, in both urban and rural areas. 
Our &pound;2 bus fare has cut bus fares outside 
London by 6.2%. We will extend the &pound;2 bus 
fare cap in England for the entirety of the 
next Parliament, benefitting young people 
and low-income households while pensioners 
continue to benefit from the free bus pass. The 
extension of the &pound;2 fare cap will be funded by 
savings from reform of the railway which will 
save up to &pound;1.5 billion annually. 

Too often over the last few years, local Labour 
politicians have made the journeys on which 
people rely harder. We are determined to 
turn this situation around. Since 2010, the 
Conservative Government has consistently 
been on the side of drivers. We have prioritised 
freezes in Fuel Duty and recently published 
our 'Plan for Drivers' including reforms to make 
better use of bus lanes, introduce penalties 
for overrunning street works and implement 
a consistent approach to the enforcement of 
entering yellow box junctions. Following the 
recent consultation, we will allow motorcycles 
in all bus lanes and reform motorcycle 
licensing. 

We will roll out the National Parking Platform 
this year to simplify paying for parking. 
Reflecting feedback from older and disabled 
people, we will also give councils the power to 
ban pavement parking, provided they engage 
with businesses and residents to ensure they 
are not adversely affected. 

We remain steadfastly committed to road safety 
and, to that end, will maintain our pledge to 
build no new smart motorways and invest in 
improving the safety of existing ones. 

<pb/>
2025 marks the 200th anniversary of the 
first passenger railway in the UK and we are 
the only party with a credible plan for rail 
reform. Labour's incoherent and ideological 
nationalisation plan would put the trade unions 
in charge, continuing to prolong unaffordable 
and unfair working practices which are 
unjustifiable to the public. 

We will introduce a Rail Reform Bill in our first 
King's Speech to create Great British Railways 
(GBR), headquartered in Derby. GBR will usher 
in a revitalised private-public partnership, 
delivering a modern and innovative railway with 
reliable services, and simpler tickets. We will 
task GBR with growing the role of the private 
sector, including supporting the expansion of 
open access services to bring greater choice 
for passengers. We will also look to include 
measures to reform outdated working practices 
in the rail industry in the Rail Reform Bill. 

Over the next Parliament, we will also roll 
out mobile pay as you go contactless tickets 
nationwide, bringing rail into line with how we 
pay for many goods and services. 

We will work with Active Travel England to 
make it safer for people to walk or cycle, 
including projects like ensuring safe walking 
routes to schools and measures to protect 
pedestrians, cyclists and other vulnerable 
road users. Where new schemes are 
introduced, we will ensure they have local 
support first. While we back responsible 
cyclists, we will bring penalties for the rare 
instances where dangerous cyclists kill or 
injure into line with those for other road users. 

Protecting our heritage andinstitutions 

The Conservative Party will always protect 
our national heritage - including statues, 
monuments and memorials. We will keep 
our 'retain and explain' guidance under 
review to ensure it supports custodians in 
the preservation of our national history and 
heritage. We will continue to support museums 
and libraries across the country. Government 
has the power to leverage philanthropy for 
good causes and cultural institutions. We will 
work with individuals, businesses, charities and 
other networks to find opportunities to unleash 
this even further. We will complete the review 
of Gift Aid within the next Parliament. 

We will ensure Royal Mail continues to deliver 
the universal postal service in a way which 
is affordable for customers as well as being 
efficient and financially sustainable. Saturday 
deliveries are important, particularly to 
businesses, which is why we are clear they will 
not be scrapped. Conservatives are clear we 
want a continued six-day service, which Labour 
and the trade unions would put at risk. 

We have taken exceptional and unprecedented 
action, legislating to quash the convictions 
of those affected by the Post Office Horizon 
scandal, one of the greatest miscarriages of 
justice in our nation's history. We will ensure 
the new redress scheme is in place and ready 
to make payments to claimants by the end of 
July. We are clear that the Post Office should 
be a valuable social and economic asset for 
communities and businesses for years to come. 
That requires a change of culture at the top to 
deliver the scale of change needed across the 
organisation. 

We have legislated to require banks and 
building societies considering closing a branch 
to consider the needs of all their customers 
and ensure they continue to have appropriate 
access to cash in their local community. We 
have already announced over 100 Banking 
Hubs which enable customers to access free to 


<pb/>
use cash and everyday banking services. 

We remain steadfast in our support for the 

fundamental principles that underpin the 
UK's constitutional settlement. We remain 
committed to the First Past the Post system for 
elections, maintaining the direct link with the 
local voter. We will not change the voting age 
from 18. We will maintain rules to tackle voting 
fraud, including the requirement to show ID. 

Our plan for greaterprotections around sex and 
gender 

Biological sex is a reality. The overwhelming 
majority of people in this country recognise 
that. It is right that we have in place provisions 
and protections for those whose sense of self 
does not match their biological sex. However, 
we will not allow the safety and privacy of 
women and girls to be undermined. 

It has been more than a decade since 
the Equality Act was passed by a Labour 
Government. It has not kept pace with evolving 
interpretations and is not sufficiently clear 
on when it means sex and when it means 
gender. The next Conservative Government 
will introduce primary legislation to clarify 
that the protected characteristic of sex 
in the Equality Act means biological sex. 
This will guarantee that single sex services 
and single sex spaces can be provided, for 
example in healthcare and sports settings, to 
ensure women and girls are protected. We are 
clear that on fundamental matters of personal 
identity there should be one approach across 
the country, so we will also legislate so that an 
individual can only have one sex in the eyes 
of the law in the United Kingdom. 

In recent years, an increasing number of 
children have started questioning their gender, 
the consequences of which are still unknown. 
This is why we will pass legislation to ensure 
schools must follow our guidance for teachers 
on how best to support gender questioning 
students in schools and colleges. Parents 

will have a right to know if their child wants to 
be treated as the opposite sex and schools 
will have to involve parents when it comes to 
decisions about their children. 

We are clear that no one in this country should 
be harmed or harassed for who they are. That 
is why we are proud that the UK has one of 
the world's strongest legislative frameworks 
to prevent and tackle discrimination and 
harassment against those with particular 
protected characteristics, including sexual 
orientation and gender reassignment. Attempts 
at so-called 'conversion therapy' are abhorrent. 
But legislation around conversion practices 
is a very complex issue, with existing criminal 
law already offering robust protections. The 
challenges involved can be seen, for example, 
with the SNP re-consulting for views on their 
proposals in Scotland and Sweden recently 
concluding that they will not be pursuing a 
similar ban. In light of the Cass Review Final 
Report, it is right that we take more time before 
reaching a final judgement on additional 
legislation in this area. 

Equality of opportunity 

We are committed to promoting equality of 
opportunity, not divisive identity politics. We 
value a society that is inclusive no matter what 
sex, sexual orientation, ethnicity or religion a 
person is. Our United Kingdom is a multi-
ethnic, multi-racial, multi-faith success story. 
Our Inclusive Britain plan advances opportunity 
while tackling unfair ethnic disparities across 
education, employment, health and the justice 
system. We are seeing some of the most 
entrenched disparities in our society narrowing, 
for example in our justice system and our police 
forces, we now have the highest proportion of 
ethnic minority officers, judges and magistrates 
since records began. 

Our ambition is to make this country the most 
accessible place in the world for people 
with disabilities to live, work and thrive. We 
are delivering on our Disability Action Plan 
to transform the everyday lives of people 

<pb/>
with disabilities. We passed the British Sign 
Language Act to ensure all public services and 
information are accessible to Deaf people who 
use BSL. The Down Syndrome Act will improve 
access to services and the quality of life of 
people with Down's syndrome. In the next 
Parliament we will improve support for people 
who have guide or assistance dogs and explore 
bidding to host and deliver the 2031 Special 
Olympics World Summer Games. 

We are proud of our record on delivering for 
LGBT people and will continue to do so. We 
passed the Same Sex Marriage Act to give 
same-sex couples the opportunity to enjoy the 
institution of marriage. We have delivered the 
largest national roll out of PrEP in Europe. 


<pb/>
Our food and farming sectors 
generate over &pound;120 billion for the 
UK economy every year. In the 
last Parliament, we maintained 
the farming budget to support our 
food security. In England, this has 
supported farmers with a range of 
options to choose what works best 
for them, from business advice to 
new equipment, soil and nutrient 
management and hedgerow 
planting. Labour's actions in Wales 
show that they will never be on 
the side of the farming community. 
Their blueprint involves top-down 
targets, fundamentally denying 
farmers the flexibility they need 
to achieve environmental goals 
in ways that work for them and 
making their primary job of 
keeping the nation fed harder. 
Conservatives will always be on 
the side of farmers. 
To continue backing our farmers, we will: 

&bullet; 
Increase the UK-wide farming budget 
by &pound;1 billion over the Parliament, 
ensuring it rises by inflation in every year. 
Farmers will be able to spend every 
extra penny on grants to boost domestic 
food production on top of maintaining 
our approach to Environmental Land 
Management Schemes. In England, nearly 
half of all farmers have now signed up to 
schemes, choosing what works best for 
their business to invest in food security and 
sustainable agriculture. We will build on 
work to date to ensure our schemes work 
for all farmers, from tenants to the uplands 
and beyond. 

&bullet; 
Continue to ringfence agricultural funding 
so it is passed directly on to farming and 
rural communities in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland alongside a new UK-wide 
&pound;20 million Farming Innovation Fund. 

&bullet; 
Introduce a legally binding target to 
enhance our food security. The target 
will apply UK-wide alongside our UK Food 
Security Index, the first of its kind, helping 
us to determine where best to concentrate 
farming funds. This will also feed into the 
development of the Land Use Framework. 

&bullet; 
Improve public sector procurement to 
deliver our goal that at least 50% of food 
expenditure is spent on food produced 
locally or to higher environmental 
production standards. 

&bullet; 
Reform our planning system to deliver 
fast track permissions for the building 
of infrastructure on farms, such as 
glasshouses, slurry and grain stores, and 
small-scale reservoirs. 

&bullet; 
Use our significant investment in R&D to 
prioritise cutting-edge technology in areas 
such as fertiliser and vertical farming. 

&bullet; 
Stick to our plan to support the agricultural 
sector with the labour it needs to maintain 
our food security, while moving away from 
the reliance on seasonal migrant labour 
with a five-year visa tapered scheme, 
alongside clear investment in automation 
and promoting agri-food careers and skills. 

&bullet; 
Always stand up for farmers when 
negotiating new trade deals. At the 2023 
UK Farm to Fork Summit, an event which 
we will continue every year, we set out our 
commitments to ensure UK farming is at the 
heart of UK trade. We will always look for 
the right deal for farmers. We will continue 
to support UK agri-food and drink attach&eacute;s 
in our embassies abroad, pioneering new 
markets and new opportunities for our 
domestic food and drink industry. 


<pb/>
Championing our fishingsector 

We have taken back control of our waters 
post-Brexit and will continue to back our fishing 
sector to feed the nation, build long term 
sustainability, and grow coastal businesses 
from Shetland to Cornwall. In 2024, we 
secured quotas worth over &pound;970 million for UK 
fishermen. We will go further to seek additional 
opportunities for our inshore fleet in the 2026 
negotiations, and ensure inshore voices are 
better heard by their representative bodies. 

We will replicate the &pound;100 million UK Seafood 
Fund to continue to support the sector to 
thrive. The fund could be used to invest in 
harbour and fish market upgrades, provide new 
equipment and technology for fish processing 
or to support our growing aquaculture sector. 
We will particularly concentrate funding on 
small and medium sized businesses and the 
inshore fishing fleet. Recognising competing 
pressure on marine space, we will also seek 
opportunities to back the inshore fleet when 
making marine planning decisions. 

<pb/>
64 

<pb/>
Conservatives are committed to 
nurturing a thriving rural economy. 
Rural areas already contribute 
over &pound;250 billion to the economy. 
We will build on this, supporting 
jobs, growth and education in rural 
communities. 
Over 80% of properties across the country can 
now access high-speed broadband, up from just 
7% in 2019, with a record &pound;714 million committed 
to boosting rural broadband coverage in 2024. 
We will invest in new technology to achieve our 
ambitious broadband targets for hard-to-reach 
areas. On transport, the &pound;2 fare cap has cut rural 
bus fares by over 11% and our commitment in our 
Backing Drivers Bill not to introduce pay per mile 
road pricing schemes will ensure people who rely 
on their cars in rural areas are protected. 

We will do more to boost the availability of 
affordable housing for local people in rural 
areas. We will ensure rural exception sites 
support local people into home ownership and 
create a dedicated taskforce in Homes England 
to deliver on the mission set out in their Rural 
Housing Statement to invest in regeneration 
and building high quality homes. We will ensure 
councils have the powers they need to manage 
the uncontrolled growth of holiday lets, which 
can cause nuisance to residents and a broader 
'hollowing out' of communities. 

Conservatives will always seek to preserve 
and enhance the rural way of life. We will 
make no changes to the Hunting Act. Further, 
public arms-length bodies must be responsive 
to those they serve. Rural communities are 
clear that improvements must be made to the 
ways in which these bodies consult and make 
decisions, especially from Natural England and 
the Environment Agency. We will improve their 
accountability and give them clearer objectives 
to focus on. They must take balanced decisions 
and factor in the impact on the rural economy. 

In recent years we have seen increasingly 
extreme wet weather, underlining the 

importance of building flood resilience. Since 
2010, Government investment has better 
protected over 600,000 properties from 
flooding and coastal erosion, and since 2015, 
has protected over 900,000 acres of farmland. 
In 2020, we announced a doubling of capital 
funding into flood defences in England to 
a record &pound;5.6 billion over 2021-2027. We 
will maintain this record flooding funding 
to continue to protect homes, farms and 
businesses. This will work alongside the 
Flood Recovery Framework and Farming 
Recovery Fund to directly support communities, 
businesses and farmers affected by flooding. 

Enhancing nature andprotecting our environment 

Our beautiful countryside, coastline, woods 
and rivers are a crucial part of what makes 
our country so special. We are committed 
to leaving the environment in a better state 
for future generations. We introduced our 
landmark Environment Act including ambitious 
targets to halt nature's decline by 2030 and 
Biodiversity Net Gain, a world leading scheme 
to deliver greener new development. We led 
international efforts to protect our oceans and 
seas, building on the success of the Blue Belt 
programme which protects an area of ocean 
the size of India. We will consult UK overseas 
territories on opportunities to expand it 
further. 

We will continue with our moratorium on deep 
sea mining and will ratify the Global Oceans 
Treaty early in the next Parliament. We have 
prioritised animal welfare, passing legislation 
to protect pets from harm whilst ensuring 
owners are responsible and cracking down on 
dangerous dogs such as XL Bullies. We remain 
committed to banning the import of hunting 
trophies and tackling puppy smuggling and 
livestock worrying. 

Water supply interruptions to customers have 
decreased five-fold and leakage has been 
cut by one-third since privatisation. Last year 
90% of our designated bathing waters were 


<pb/>
classified as 'good' or 'excellent', up from 76% 
in 2010. But we must go further. That is why we 
set out an ambitious Plan for Water, bringing 
historic levels of transparency and investment, 
while keeping bill increases affordable for 
consumers. Our plan includes: 

&bullet; 
Working with the regulator to further 
hold companies to account, including 
banning executive bonuses if a company has 
committed a serious criminal breach. This will 
build on our legislation for unlimited fines. 

&bullet; 
Extending the &pound;50 water rebate for those 
in the South West across the Parliament. 

&bullet; 
Using fines from water companies to invest 
in river restoration projects, including linking 
up thriving habitats to multiply the benefits 
for wildlife and water quality. This will create 
a river recovery network, modelled on our 
nature recovery network, and create new 
destinations for people to enjoy across 
England. It will take a more local, tailored 
approach like the plan for the River Wye. 

The next five years will see transformational 
investment and change in the water sector 
on a scale never seen before, thanks to the 
introduction of 100% monitoring - up from 
7% under the last Labour Government - and 
targets on leaks and pollution. To deliver our 
ambitious plan for water beyond 2030, we will 

reform the 'Price Review' regulatory process 
for water companies. This will consider how 
we move to a more localised catchment-based 
and outcome-focussed approach, that better 
utilises nature-based solutions and further 
strengthens sanctions for water companies that 
fail to deliver for the public, coasts and rivers. 

We are sticking to our ambitious plan to plant 
more trees. We will: 

&bullet; 
Deliver our tree planting and peatland 
commitments through our Nature for 
Climate funding, and continuing our work to 
unlock private investment. 

&bullet; 
Launch a new design competition for 

urban greening, focused on the new 
quarters we want to develop in Leeds, 
Cambridge and sites in inner London. 

&bullet; 
Cut red tape that holds back the planting 
of trees in the planning system. This will 
identify particularly suitable areas for tree 
planting where processes and permits will be 
streamlined. 

&bullet; 
Deliver our commitment at COP28 to 

introduce forest risk commodities 

legislation early in the next Parliament, 
tackling our impact on illegal deforestation 
internationally. 

We know that spending time outdoors in 
nature can significantly benefit our health and 
wellbeing, especially for children. That is why 
we set an ambitious commitment for everyone 
to have access to nature within 15 minutes' 
walk of where they live. To deliver this, we will: 

&bullet; 
Designate our 11th National Park alongside 
investing to improve existing National 
Parks and protected landscapes. 

&bullet; 
Use future rounds of our Landscape 
Recovery Scheme to support more local 
projects like the community-led schemes 
near Hadrian's Wall as the area recovers 
from the vandalism at the Sycamore Gap. 

&bullet; 
Continue to support programmes that 
encourage disadvantaged children and 
young people to access green spaces. 

&bullet; 
Deliver our commitments on National 
Trails including the Coast to Coast Path 
and the King Charles III England Coast 
Path. 

&bullet; 
Continue to work with landowners, 
charities and others to open up more 
'access to nature' routes. We will not 
impose a universal Right to Roam. 

We will take comprehensive action to crack 
down on organised waste crime, especially 
those who impact protected nature sites. 
We will deliver our enhanced penalties for 

<pb/>
fly tipping, giving councils new tools to help 
tackle offenders. We will continue to develop 
a UK-wide Deposit Return Scheme, while 
working to minimise the impact on businesses 
and consumers. We will prevent new waste 
incinerators being built, including those with 
recent permit approvals, revoking those 
where substantial construction has not taken 
place. This recognises the impact on local 
communities and that increased recycling rates 
will reduce the need for incineration capacity in 
the longer term. 


<pb/>
At the core of our national and 
local identities is culture and sport. 
We are proud of our investment in grassroots 
sports across the country, with over &pound;320 
million being delivered between 2021 and 
2025 to build, renovate and maintain grass 
pitches and, multi-sport facilities. We will 
maintain this pace of investment over the next 
Parliament through the continuation of the 
Multi-Sport Grassroots Facilities Programme. 
We will look to expand the criteria to ensure 
more sports benefit from this investment. We 
will introduce laws to ensure our fans never 
again face the threat of clubs in England 
joining breakaway closed-shop competitions 
and giving them more of a voice through the 
Independent Football Regulator. 

The Conservative Party stands up for women 
and girls in sport. We delivered equal access 
for grassroots sporting facilities for women and 
girls, the &pound;30 million Lionesses Futures Fund, 
established the Board of Women's Sport and 
are implementing recommendations from the 
Carney Review of Women's Football. We will 
prioritise equal access for women and girls 
in our ongoing programme of investment in 
grassroots sports facilities. 

Supporting our world-
leading creative industries 

We believe apprenticeships are a key pipeline 
of talent into our world-leading creative 
industries. We will work with industry to deliver 
a dedicated flexible coordination service so 
that everyone who wants to work in the film, 
TV, gaming and music sectors can work on live 
productions whilst benefiting from at least 12 
months of secure training. 

We will ensure our creative sector tax incentives 
remain competitive. The UK is now the second 
most popular place in the world to make 
films and high-end TV. That's a direct result 
of Conservatives taking action: there have 
been 1 million new jobs since 2010 and the 
economic value of the creative industries has 
doubled. We provided an unprecedented &pound;1.57 

billion support package during Covid. We will 
ensure creators are properly protected and 
remunerated for their work, whilst also making 
the most of the opportunities of AI and its 
applications for creativity in the future. 

As well as standing behind the creative sector 
we have also stood behind our pubs and 
hospitality businesses, prioritising them for 
Business Rates relief and freezing alcohol duty. 
But, in parts of the country, hospitality and 
particularly our nighttime economy is in decline. 
In Wales, Labour have hiked taxes on business 
by axing tax relief. In London, despite the high 
profile hiring of a 'Night Czar' by the Labour 
Mayor, over 3,000 pubs, bars and nightclubs 
have closed in the capital since March 2020. 
We will turn this around by launching a review 
of the nighttime economy in England, looking at 
how to reverse the decline in pubs and clubs and 
how to make our towns and cities great places to 
go out. 

The BBC should represent the perspectives 
of the entire nation with diversity of thought, 
accuracy and impartiality as its guiding 
principles. We will carefully consider the 
findings of the Funding Review ahead of the 
next Royal Charter and ensure it upholds these 
principles. We will introduce a new complaints 
process for the BBC so the BBC does not mark 
its own homework. 

The Conservative Party is a strong defender of 
freedom of speech and freedom of the press. 
We oppose state regulation and control of the 
press, including any attempt to bring forward 
Leveson 2 or re-open the Royal Charter on 
self-regulation of the press. We were proud 
to deliver the Freedom of Speech Act to 
protect free speech and open debate in our 
universities. 


<pb/>
Our plan to strengthen 
the United Kingdom 


<pb/>
In recent years, each part of the 
UK has worked together to tackle 
shared challenges. The United 
Kingdom is a unique and uniquely 
successful Union, enabling each 
constituent part to grow and 
thrive. As the Conservative and 
Unionist Party, we are committed 
to supporting our Union and 
continuing to deliver for people 
across the UK. 
During the 25th anniversary year of devolution, 
we celebrate the progress which has been 
made and the relationships which have been 
built. We are focused on working together to 
deliver for people across the UK, including 
maintaining meaningful intergovernmental 
relations. Since the initial devolution 
settlements, significant further powers have 
been devolved to Holyrood, Cardiff Bay and 
Stormont. We believe governments in Scotland, 
Wales and Northern Ireland now have the right 
balance of powers to deliver for people there. 

As powers have been transferred, it has 
become more important than ever that the 
devolved governments are held responsible 
for their performance. To support this, we will 
legislate to deliver comparable data across the 
UK so the performance of public services can 
be accurately compared. 

We support greater accountability within 
the devolved parliaments and centralisation 
within Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
to ensure decisions are made as close to 
the communities they serve as possible. 
Devolved governments should be focused 
on utilising the powers they have to deliver 
on people's priorities and we will continue to 
oppose attempts to distract from these with 
constitutional wrangling. 

We will relentlessly protect the UK's internal 
market, securing Northern Ireland's place in it 

and protecting consumers and businesses from 
unnecessary trade barriers. Intra-UK trade is 
worth &pound;190 billion, and to boost this, we have 
legislated to guarantee unfettered access for 
goods from Northern Ireland to the rest of the 
UK and will establish a new Intertrade UK body 
to promote trade within the United Kingdom. 
The UK Internal Market Act ensures businesses 
can sell goods and provide services freely 
across the UK. 

Levelling up across the UK 

Delivering for people right across the country 
requires joint working between the UK and 
devolved governments as well as local 
partners. Our focus on delivery and working 
with local partners to do so, has paid dividends 
in recent years, providing: 

&bullet; 
over &pound;3 billion of investment in levelling up 
in Scotland; 

&bullet; 
over &pound;2.5 billion to level up Wales; and 

&bullet; 
over &pound;1 billion for levelling up projects in 
Northern Ireland. 

The UK Government has a duty to citizens 
right across the country. Over the course of 
the last Parliament we have been building 
stronger relationships with local authorities 
and community groups in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland to help us deliver for people 
there. We are committed to continuing to fund 
projects across the UK directly and will: 

&bullet; 
Extend the UK Shared Prosperity Fund for 
another three years, delivering a further 
&pound;540 million a year for communities across 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. 

&bullet; 
Expand the Long-Term Plan for Towns, 
supporting a further nine towns in Scotland, 
Wales and Northern Ireland with &pound;20 
million endowments to make long-term 
improvements over 10 years. 

&bullet; 
Maintain the Community Ownership 
Fund for another three years, enabling 
community groups across Scotland, Wales 


<pb/>
and Northern Ireland to continue accessing 
funding to save community assets which are 
at risk of being lost. 

&bullet; 
Continue the Multi-Sport Grassroots 
Facilities Programme throughout the next 
Parliament so sports facilities in Scotland, 
Wales and Northern Ireland can access vital 
investment. 

These schemes improve communities and 
support infrastructure as well as sports 
and cultural activities across the UK, sitting 
alongside our backing for events such as the 
Hay Festival, the Edinburgh Festival and Fringe 
and the UK and Ireland Euro 2028 tournament. 

We will support Freeports and investment 
zones in Scotland and Wales, delivering jobs 
and investment from the Cromarty Firth to Port 
Talbot, and establish an Enhanced Investment 
Zone in Northern Ireland. 

We will pursue the extension of the Enhanced 
Investment Zone to cover Stranraer and 
Cairnryan on the west coast of Scotland, 
recognising this vital route between Northern 
Ireland and Scotland and the opportunities for 
trade and economic growth. 

Our Islands Forum will also continue to bring 
together island communities from across the 
UK to consider and identify solutions to their 
unique needs. 

Scotland 

Ten years on from the 2014 independence 
referendum, the SNP remain focused on the 
constitution while Scotland has moved on. They 
are distracted from the day job, with falling 
educational standards, rising drug deaths and 
long-delayed ferries. The Conservatives and 
Unionists will continue to oppose this - the 
2014 vote was decisive. 

Instead, we will focus on what really matters to 
people. 

We will cut taxes for working people again, 
benefitting 2.4 million Scots. We are also boosting 
Scotland's economy through mechanisms such 
as our City and Growth Deals, dedicated British 
Business Bank fund and support for Scottish 
exports. Our new Intertrade UK body will promote 
trade within the United Kingdom, with 61% of 
Scotland's exports going to the rest of the UK in 
2021. 

We will press for the permanent removal 
of tariffs on Scotch whisky with the US 
Government and work to achieve a significant 
tariff reduction in India through free trade 
agreement discussions. Scottish businesses 
will also continue to benefit from measures 
including tax reliefs for creative industries, 
support for small businesses and entrepreneurs 
and the Global Britian Investment Fund. 

We will prioritise our energy security. We have 
already put the Energy Security Investment 
Mechanism into legislation, ensuring the energy 
profits levy will end when oil and gas prices 
fall below a threshold. We will bring legislate 
to require annual oil and gas licensing rounds 
and maintain investment allowances for the 
oil and gas sector while supporting renewable 
technologies. 

We will continue backing the North Sea 
Transition Deal and Aberdeen City Region Deal, 
with Aberdeen's Investment Zone bringing &pound;160 
million of support to the area over the next ten 
years. We will focus on supporting Scotland's 
workforce transition to new industries such 

<pb/>
as carbon capture, offshore wind, hydrogen 
and tidal, including by providing &pound;15 million 
to support the Energy Transition Zone's skills 
programmes. We will continue laying the 
groundwork for nuclear projects to be taken 
forward in Scotland to deliver cheaper, cleaner 
and more secure energy. 

We will support Scotland's fishing and 
farming industries. We have extended the 
Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme until 
2029, introduced a new UK-wide Food Security 
Index and will increase the UK-wide farming 
budget by &pound;1 billion over the next Parliament, 
ensuring the ringfenced amount provided to 
the Scottish Government rises by inflation each 
year. We will use powers in the Scotland Act 
to require the Scottish Government to provide 
annual reports on how this funding is being 
utilised and work with them to put a UK-wide 
food security target into law. 

We will establish a UK Farming Innovation 
Fund to deliver grants for innovative 
agricultural projects directly to farmers in 
Scotland, promoting economic development 
in rural areas. Only the Conservatives and 
Unionists will support Scotland's fishing 
communities, with a further &pound;100 million for the 
UK Seafood Fund to support small businesses 
and inshore fleets and a steadfast commitment 
to taking back control of our waters, negotiating 
the best quotas possible and remaining out of 
the hated Common Fisheries Policy. 

We will improve connectivity across Scotland 
with support for road and rail improvements 
and ferry services, including guaranteed 
investment to improve pinch points on the 
A75, providing &pound;5 million for the evaluation of 
proposals to extend the current Borders Railway 
from Tweedbank through Hawick and on to 
Carlisle, updating the East Coast Main Line 
timetable to provide faster rail journeys between 
Edinburgh and London and providing funding for 
the UK Islands Forum Connectivity Project. 

Wales 

The Labour Welsh Government have let 
standards slide across crucial public services 
while focusing on policies people in Wales do 
not want, from putting more politicians in the 
Senedd to implementing a blanket 20mph 
speed limit across Wales and banning new 
roadbuilding. 

By contrast, the Conservatives and Unionists 
are delivering for Wales by cutting taxes 
again for 1.2 million working people in Wales 
and making investments in industry, local 
communities and infrastructure. 

And we want to go further. 

To improve connectivity across Wales, 
we'll provide match funding to the Welsh 
Government to reconsider the M4 relief road 
and third Menai crossing options as well as 
wider improvements to the A55 and the A483 
around Wrexham. We will provide funding to 
Monmouthshire Council to develop plans for 
a Chepstow bypass and prioritise the Pant-
Llanymynech bypass. 

As a result of our decision to cancel the second 
phase of HS2 and invest the savings into local 
transport projects, we can commit &pound;1 billion 
for the electrification of the North Wales Main 
Line and ensure Wales starts receiving Barnett 
consequentials for the projects funded from 
HS2 savings in England. We will fund rail 
upgrades at Padeswood to unlock the potential 
for wider improvements on the Borderlands 
Line and facilitate the electrification of the 
North Wales Main Line. We will prioritise 
development of the Pencoed level crossing 
and progressing work on the South Wales Main 
Line, to deliver new stations and services. 

We will expand our Backing Drivers' Bill to 
cover Wales, reversing Labour's blanket 20mph 
speed limit by requiring local consent for 
20mph zones and giving local communities the 
legal right to challenge existing zones. 


<pb/>
To support Wales' key sectors and industrial 
heritage, Welsh farmers will benefit from a &pound;1 
billion increase to the UK-wide farming budget, 
ensuring the ringfenced amount directed to 
Welsh farmers increases by inflation throughout 
the next Parliament, as well as grants for 
innovative agricultural projects from the &pound;20 
million UK Farming Innovation Fund and the 
extension of the Seasonal Agricultural Worker 
Scheme. 

We will also build on our new UK-wide food 
security index by putting a UK-wide food 
security target into law, adopt a consistent 
approach to biosecurity across Great Britain 
and require the Welsh Government to provide 
annual reports on how ringfenced agricultural 
funding from the UK Government is spent. 

The &pound;500 million we are investing to secure 
a sustainable future for steelmaking in Port 
Talbot is bolstered by the &pound;80 million the UK 
Government is providing to support the area to 
transition. We remain committed to delivering 
the electric arc furnace and supporting Port 
Talbot to thrive, including through the new 
Celtic Freeport. Floating offshore wind is at the 
heart of these plans and we will continue to 
support its development in the Celtic Sea. We 
will deliver the UK's third mega-nuclear power 
station at Wylfa and support Wales' potential to 
host small modular reactors. 

To strengthen Wales' public services, we will 
put an additional neighbourhood police officer 
in every community across Wales, restore trust 
in policing and introduce tougher sentencing to 
make Wales safer. 

Improving the comparability of data across 
the UK will ensure the current Labour Welsh 
Government are held to account for their 
performance running Wales' schools and 
hospitals. We will assess options to promote 
choice in NHS services across the UK, whether 
provided by the NHS or independent sector, 
and improve interoperability between the 
NHS in different parts of the UK, cross-border 
healthcare processes and joint working to 
tackle waiting lists. 

We will continue working with the Welsh 
Government on the expansion of Levelling 
Up Partnerships to Wales and support the 
Welsh language, including by backing Welsh 
broadcasting and the equitable provision of UK 
Government services in Welsh. 

We will bring forward legislation to reapply the 
entirety of the Trade Union Act 2016 to Wales. 
And a Welsh Conservative Government would 
reverse Labour's plans to expand the Senedd, 
redirecting the cost towards people's real 
priorities. 

<pb/>
Northern Ireland 

As Conservatives and Unionists, we continue to 
hugely value Northern Ireland's contribution to 
our Union. For us, the best future for Northern 
Ireland will always be as part of a strong, 
prosperous and dynamic United Kingdom. We will 
never be neutral in expressing our support for it. 

At the same time, we respect those who seek 
a different constitutional outcome pursued by 
exclusively peaceful and democratic means. We 
will always govern in the interests of the whole 
community in Northern Ireland. Our aim is to 
build a Northern Ireland where politics works, the 
economy grows and society is stronger and more 
united. 

Our commitment to the 1998 Belfast (Good Friday) 
Agreement in all its parts remains unwavering. 
Fundamental to the Agreement is the consent 
principle - that there can be no change to the 
constitutional status of Northern Ireland without 
the support of a majority of those who live there. 
Conservatives will always uphold the democratic 
wishes of the people of Northern Ireland. 

&bullet; 
We are committed to supporting Northern 
Ireland's communities and economy to 
thrive. At the last Spending Review, we 
provided the Northern Ireland Executive 
with a record &pound;15 billion a year through the 
block grant. To underpin the restoration 
of devolution, we provided the incoming 
Executive with a &pound;3.3 billion spending 
package and subsequently agreed an interim 
fiscal framework in May 2024. We are also 
delivering over &pound;1 billion of levelling up 
funding, including &pound;150 million to develop 
an Enhanced Investment Zone. We hosted 
an Investment Summit in Northern Ireland 
last year, showcasing its innovation and 
technological strengths. And cutting National 
Insurance again will benefit 800,000 working 
people in Northern Ireland. 

&bullet; 
The Windsor Framework and our 
Safeguarding the Union Command Paper 
have addressed the fundamental problems 
with the old Northern Ireland Protocol 

and provide Northern Ireland with unique 
advantages, including guaranteed unfettered 
access to the UK internal market and 
privileged access to the EU Single Market 
for goods. Through our UK internal market 
system, we have ensured that goods moving 
from Great Britain to Northern Ireland that 
will only ever stay in the United Kingdom 
are subject to no checks, save for those 
conducted by UK authorities as part of a 
risk-based or intelligence-led approach to 
tackle criminality, abuse of the scheme, 
smuggling and disease risks. In addition, 
through the Stormont Brake we have 
addressed the democratic deficit in the old 
Protocol. A Conservative Government will 
faithfully implement all its commitments in the 
Windsor Framework and the Command Paper, 
including those measures to strengthen 
Northern Ireland's place in the Union. 

&bullet; 
Through the Northern Ireland Troubles 
(Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 
we have established the Independent 
Commission for Reconciliation and 
Information Recovery with &pound;250 million 
of funding to ensure victims and survivors 
can recover more information about what 
happened to their loved ones than has been 
available through established mechanisms. 
We will continue to implement this legacy 
legislation and support the Commission with 
the aim of providing more answers to those 
that want them and helping society to move 
forward. 

&bullet; 
While the security situation has been 
transformed for most people in Northern 
Ireland over the past three decades, there 
remains a very real threat from dissident 
republicans who retain both a capability and 
intent to cause harm. We will always give our 
fullest possible support to the Police Service 
of Northern Ireland and other agencies for the 
vital work they do to keep people safe and 
secure. We will continue our efforts to end 
all forms of paramilitary activity for good. 


<pb/>
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2024 
Promoted by Alan Mabbutt on behalf of the Conservative and Unionist Party, both at 4 Matthew Parker Street, London, SW1H 9HQ. 
Printed by Paragon, Park House, Lower Ground Floor, 16-18 Finsbury Circus, London, EC2M 7EB. 
Promoted by Alan Mabbutt on behalf of the Conservative and Unionist Party, both at 4 Matthew Parker Street, London, SW1H 9HQ. 
Printed by Paragon, Park House, Lower Ground Floor, 16-18 Finsbury Circus, London, EC2M 7EB. 
<pb/>
