"A FUTURE 
MADE IN 
SCOTLAND." 

VOTE SNP 
FOR SCOTLAND 
<pb/>
VOTE SNP 
FOR SCOTLAND 
TO BECOME AN 
INDEPENDENT 
COUNTRY. 

<pb/>
OUR 
VISION 

"We will put 
the interests of the 
people of Scotland 
first, and protect 
public services like 
our cherished NHS." 

<pb/>
I believe people are crying out for principled 
leadership, which is prepared to argue for 
what it believes in. 

In this election, and in this manifesto, that is 
what the SNP is offering. 

Moderate left of centre policies to make life 
better for the people of Scotland. 

SNP MPs who will always put the interests of 
the people of Scotland first, and protect public 
services like our cherished NHS. 

And, at the core of what we offer, the belief 
that decisions about Scotland should be made 
in Scotland through independence. 

The Westminster system is broken, and for far 
too many people, the UK economy has failed. 

So at this election the SNP is putting forward 
a positive, optimistic and hopeful alternative 
to that broken system and that failed economy. 

The Tories have enforced deep spending cuts, 
they've imposed Brexit and have worsened the 
cost of living crisis. They need to go. 

But we have to take care about what replaces 
them - the answer is not more spending cuts. 
It is not more Brexit and it is definitely not more 
Westminster decision-making about Scotland. 

And yet that is what the Labour Party is 
committed to: cuts, Brexit and continued 
Westminster control. 

I honestly don't believe that's something 
Scotland can bear. 

Voting SNP is the best means of ensuring Labour 
are stopped from carrying out their cuts. 

 SNP MPs will do all that they can to protect 
Scotland's NHS and act to stop further austerity 
being imposed by Westminster. 

But, however hard we work, the Westminster 
conspiracy of silence between Labour and the 
Conservatives on the cuts to come and on 
the damage of Brexit, demonstrates that 
decisions about Scotland's future should 
be taken in Scotland. 

In Government at Holyrood with limited powers 
and in line with our principles, we're helping with 
the cost of living through free prescriptions, all 
day off peak rail fares and free bus travel for 
young people. 

We've grown the economy faster, per head, 
than the UK, we have the best performing core 
A&E units in the UK, and we've built 40% more 
affordable homes per head than in England, 
and over 70% more than in Wales. 

With independence, all the key decisions over 
our economy, taxes, and spending will transfer 
from Westminster to Scotland. 

I have no doubt that everyone who lives in our 
wonderful, diverse country - whether they were 
born here, or have come from the rest of the UK 
or further afield - are the best people to make 
decisions about Scotland's future. 

So on Thursday, 4th July, to remove the Tories 
from office, to put the interests of Scotland first, 
and for a future made in Scotland, vote SNP. 

John Swinney MSP, 
Leader, Scottish National Party. 

<pb/>
OUR KEY 

"We will protect 

our NHS from 

the twin threats 

of Westminster 

privatisation 

and austerity." 

PLEDGES 

Deliver independence to strengthen our 
economy, tackle the cost of living, and bring 
about a fairer country. 

End 14 years of austerity, reversing deep 
damaging cuts to public services that have put 
real pressure on the money available for the 
NHS and schools. We will stand against the 
Westminster consensus on cuts. 

Rejoin the EU, reverse the damage of Brexit 
and re-enter the single market restoring free 
movement for EU citizens. 

Tackle the cost of living crisis by providing 
urgent support for household finances and 
reducing the impact of rising interest rates and 
inflation. 

Protect our NHS from the twin threats of 
Westminster privatisation and austerity. The 
UK Government should back our Bill to keep the 
NHS in public hands and boost NHS England 
funding by at least &pound;16bn each year, providing an 
extra &pound;1.6bn to NHS Scotland. 

Reverse the &pound;1.3bn Westminster cut to our 
capital budget, to enable us to invest in new 
hospitals, schools, rail and road infrastructure 
and help to achieve net zero. 

<pb/>
Demand an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, 
release of hostages and ending arms sales 
to Israel. We call on the UK Government 
to immediately recognise Palestine as an 
independent state. 

Scrap the two child benefit cap, ending the 
unnecessary suffering caused by both the benefit 
cap on children and associated rape clause. 

Demand the devolution of new borrowing 
powers to invest in a just transition and that 
the new UK Government match our &pound;500m Just 
Transition Fund for the North East and Moray 
to help build on the region's world-renowned 
expertise, create jobs, foster innovation and 
deliver a fair and managed transition to net zero. 

Legislate for an essentials guarantee ensuring 
that everyone can afford basic necessities like 
food and utilities. 

Support the abolition of the undemocratic 
House of Lords. 

Stand up for WASPI women by making sure 
the UK Government delivers full, fast and 
fair compensation for women who have been 
wronged by pension inequality. 

Devolve powers to create a bespoke migration 
system for Scotland that values those who 
decide to work, live, study and invest here and 
allows us to address our specific demographic 
and economic needs. 

Empower workers by scrapping exploitative 
zero hours contracts, banning callous 'fire and 
rehire' practices and repealing the Minimum 
Service Bill. 

Scrap the Rwanda scheme and stand firm 
against the demonisation of migrants. 

Tackle the drugs death crisis by taking a radical 
public health approach; decriminalising drugs 
for personal use and introducing a framework to 
allow Supervised Drug Consumption Facilities. 

Protect pensions by maintaining the triple lock 
and move to deliver a wellbeing pension. We 
will oppose any further increases in the state 
pension age. 

Scrap Trident and invest the money into 
conventional defence and public services. 

Increase maternity pay by bringing the UK into 
line with other European countries and promoting 
shared parental leave. 

Defend free university tuition in Scotland. 

The SNP is the only party that will protect 
students and defend free education, meaning 
graduates in Scotland are thousands of pounds 
better off. 

<pb/>
WHY 

"In an independent 
Scotland, decisions 
about Scotland will be 
made in Scotland, 
for Scotland." 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

INDEPENDENCE? 

Independence is a vital necessity for Scotland 
because decisions taken at Westminster have 
made life more difficult for people, families, 
communities and businesses across the country. 

Austerity has caused cuts to public spending, 
Brexit has wiped billions of pounds from our 
economy compared with EU membership and 
made the cost of living crisis worse by pushing up 
food prices and other household costs. 

The UK economy has delivered stagnant wages 
and, for typical households, low living standards 
compared with similar countries. 

Indeed, for far too many people the UK economy 
is broken and it is clear Westminster doesn't 
work for Scotland. 

It doesn't have to be that way. 

Independent countries comparable to Scotland 
like Denmark, Sweden and Ireland have used the 
decision-making powers of independence 
to create more successful countries. 

They enjoy higher national income per head and 
combine that with lower inequality than the UK. 

They have higher levels of productivity, which 
is the key driver of living standards, and lower 
levels of poverty. 

So why not Scotland? We have the resources, 
industries and talent to match that success. 
We have extraordinary energy resources, 

a world-class food and drink industry, brilliant 
tourism, financial services and creative industries 
and we are leading in cutting edge sectors such 
as satellite building. 

Independence is the means of addressing 
concerns over the cost of living and funding 
of the NHS. We believe the powers that come 
with independence are essential to building 
the stronger economy required to boost living 
standards and public services. 

The Scottish Parliament election of 2021 
resulted in a clear majority of MSPs in favour 
of both independence and a referendum. 
People gave their democratic verdict. 

The UK Government, however, refused to 
cooperate with the Scottish Government 
to put that democratic mandate into effect. 

Given the UK is going so badly in the wrong 
direction it is more important than ever for 
the mandate won in 2021 to be respected. 

At this election we are asking you to vote SNP 
for an independent Scotland. If the SNP wins 
a majority of Scottish seats, the Scottish 
Government will be empowered to begin 
immediate negotiations with the UK Government 
to give democratic effect to Scotland becoming 
an independent country. 

It is through the power of democratic pressure 
that we will secure the right of people in Scotland 
to decide their future. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 07 

<pb/>
ENDING 
AUSTERITY 

"We will stand 
firmly against the 
Westminster consensus 
on continued cuts and 
demand increased 
investment in our vital 
public services." 

<pb/>
Scotland has suffered fourteen years of Tory 
imposed austerity. Simply put, this means 
Westminster Governments have chosen to 
repeatedly slash public spending when our NHS, 
schools and other public services desperately 
need investment. These cuts have stripped 
Scotland's budget of billions - disproportionately 
hurting the poorest and most vulnerable in society. 

Cuts are a choice. And both the Tories and 
Labour have chosen to continue with further cuts 
to public spending if elected. Unless they change 
their spending plans, the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies is clear there will be a staggering &pound;18bn 
of cuts to public services. 

In stark contrast, the SNP Scottish Government 
has chosen to do all it can to mitigate these 
callous cuts but with limited economic and 
financial levers we are constrained in what 
we can do. 

Only independence can free Scotland from 
the brutal impact of Westminster cuts, 
invest properly in public services and unlock 
economic growth. 

Until then, SNP MPs will stand firmly against 
the Westminster consensus on continued cuts 
and demand increased investment in our vital 
public services. 

A FAIRER TAX SYSTEM 

Against a backdrop of biting austerity, we've 
delivered the fairest and most progressive 
income tax system in the UK - raising an 
additional &pound;1.5bn to invest in our public 
services, fund fair pay deals for nurses and 
other public sector workers and support our 
economy. However, without the full powers of 
independence, we only have a very limited range 
of tax powers to work with. 

SNP MPs will demand the full devolution of tax 
powers to enable us to create a fairer system 
that protects public services and invests in 
our economy. With the devolution of National 
Insurance, we could ensure rates and thresholds 
fit our progressive income tax rates. 

With devolution of windfall taxation for companies 
operating in Scotland, we would be able to 
tackle the twin crises of cost of living and 
climate change while meeting the specific needs 
of Scotland. We believe it is only right that 
companies making excess profits shoulder the 
burden that families face, but that this must be 
a wider tax - balanced across companies - rather 
than the raid on the North-East of Scotland 
proposed by Labour and the Tories. 

With the full devolution of tax powers, we would 
crack down on tax avoidance and evasion 
and improve the transparency of tax paid by 
international companies to ensure that they make 
a proportionate contribution to tax revenues. 

<pb/>
Devolving road tax and fuel duty would allow us 
to develop a new approach to funding road travel 
that meets Scotland's needs. 

We believe it is wrong that suncream is subject to 
VAT, but caviar is not. We support the reform of VAT 
to address the current imbalances and to ensure 
that life saving products, like defibrillators, are as 
accessible and affordable as possible. 

We have already removed charitable rates relief 
from private schools in Scotland, and with full 
powers over VAT we would go further and end the 
exemption for private schools. 

To drive economic growth and help in our 
transition to net zero we would introduce a 
lower rate of VAT for hospitality and tourism 
sectors, address the imbalance in VAT rates 
in the construction sector to encourage the 
refurbishment and retrofitting of existing 
buildings and remove VAT from on-street electric 
vehicle charging. 

UNLOCKING INVESTMENT 

Decades of Westminster cuts have left 
infrastructure across the UK creaking. It is clear 
there is a need for more investment - not only to 
support the delivery of public services but also to 
grow the economy. 

The Tories in Westminster have set their fiscal 
rules to choke off borrowing for investment and 
cap welfare spending, creating a barrier to a 
pragmatic approach to deliver vital infrastructure 
projects. We have a much more ambitious vision 
for Scotland. 

We have already invested in key infrastructure 
projects like the Borders Railway and the 
Queensferry crossing and delivered over 
128,000 affordable homes, but without a change 
in approach to fiscal rules we are reaching the 
limits of what can be done. 

The SNP is calling on the UK Government to 
scrap their fiscal rules and introduce new 
ones to allow greater investment in renewing 
infrastructure and services. The UK Government 
must abandon the current trajectory and 
recognise the value of investing in national 
infrastructure. 

Fiscal Rules 

We're proposing a sensible alternative, 
setting out three new fiscal rules to enable 
increased capital investment while instilling 
a new prudent approach to government 
finances: 

● Public Sector Net Worth rule - recognising 
the value of investing in infrastructure 
and public sector assets, rather than 
just liabilities 
● Upper limit on debt servicing costs - 
to allow explicit consideration of the 
sustainability of the stock of debt 
● Three-year detailed spending plans - 
to support detailed planning and improve 
clarity for devolved administrations. 
<pb/>
 "We will call on the 
UK Government to 
scrap their fiscal 
rules to allow 
greater investment 
in infrastructure 
and public 
services." 

PRIORITISING PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE 

Scotland's capital budget, which pays for 
our hospitals, roads and schools, has been 
hammered by successive Westminster 
Governments refusing to prioritise investment. 

Westminster's cuts to capital funding have 
disrupted longer term investment and, as a 
result, restricted the growth of the Scottish 
economy. 

In the UK Spring Budget, the Tories cut capital yet 
again, this time by almost 9% - or a cumulative 
loss of &pound;1.3bn by 2027/28. This cut, coupled 
with sky high inflation, places unprecedented 
pressure on our infrastructure budget. 

It is vital that the UK Government at least reverse 
the &pound;1.3bn cut to our capital budget, to enable 
us to invest in the new hospitals, schools, rail 
and road infrastructure we would like to see, 
and help to achieve net zero and secure the 
sustainable jobs we need for the future. 

<pb/>
Brexit has been a disaster for Scotland. Despite

REVERSE 

voting overwhelmingly to remain within the EU, 
we have been dragged out against our will and 
are powerless to escape the consequences. 

Brexit has wiped billions of pounds from the 
Scottish economy, pushed up prices on food 
and services and hit hard our ability to fund vital 
public services such as the NHS. 

We have lost access to one of the world's most 
sophisticated and integrated international justice 
and crime-fighting ecosystems, red tape is 
exacerbating medicine shortages, and the end of 
freedom of movement has made it much harder 
to recruit staff to work in our NHS, social care 
and other vital sectors. 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

BREXIT 

The Tories and Labour don't want to talk about 
what we've lost, or how much worse off we are

 "We will champion 

with Brexit. But ignoring Brexit is ignoring the 
cost of living, the economy and, fundamentally, 

our vision for 

the views of Scotland. 

These Brexit harms will continue no matter 

an independent 

who is in charge at Westminster. 

Scotland in the EU." 

We want a different future. One where decisions 
are made in Scotland, for Scotland. 

The SNP is the only party offering people 
Rejoining the EU would deliver: in Scotland that opportunity - and the choice 

of a better future. 

● Freedom of movement to live, visit, 
study and work freely in any EU country We will champion our vision for an independent 
● Cheaper and quicker trading for business Scotland in the EU, offering Scotland the 
● More funding for farming, fishing and opportunity to regain what has been lost as 
other rural sectors a result of a hard Brexit and harness the 
● Access to workers from across the EU, opportunities that independence would provide. 
enabling many of our industries to grow 
● Re-entry to the Erasmus+ scheme, 
widening educational opportunities 
for Scotland's future generations 
● A safer Scotland, working closely with 
police in the EU to help fight cross 
border crime, serious organised crime, 
cyber crime and terrorism 
● Access to the Creative Europe scheme, 
supporting culture sector cooperation 
and boosting economic potential of 
our creative industries 
DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 13 

<pb/>
TACKLE 
THE COST 
OF LIVING 
CRISIS 

"We will push for the 
fundamental change 
that is needed to tackle 
the cost of living crisis 
and improve living 
standards for all." 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

Reckless Tory economic mismanagement has 
resulted in spiralling interest rates, sky high 
energy costs, increased mortgage payments 
and left people struggling to pay their bills. 

Despite limited powers, the SNP Scottish 
Government is doing all it can to support 
people through the Westminster-made cost 
of living crisis. 

How has the SNP Scottish Government 
supported households? 

● Protected free prescriptions, personal 
care and eye tests for all 
● Expanded free childcare, saving families 
&pound;5,500 annually 
● Extended free school meal provision and 
cancelled school meal debt 
● Increased the Scottish Child Payment 
to &pound;26.70 per child per week 
● Frozen Council Tax across Scotland 
● Mitigated the UK Government's bedroom 
tax in full, supported people with housing 
costs and introduced temporary rent 
cap controls 
● Provided free bus travel for over 60s and 
under 22s - over 2.2 million people 
● Removed peak fares from our railways, 
saving commuters as much as &pound;26.20 
per return journey 
With the full powers of independence we could 
do much more but until then, to relieve the 
immediate pressure on households, SNP MPs 
at Westminster will: 

● Demand an essentials guarantee, 
ensuring that, at a minimum, everyone 
can afford basic necessities like food 
and utilities 
● Call for a statutory social tariff for energy, 
broadband and mobile charges for all 
who need one 
● Press for a significant cut in standing 
charges for all and removal of 
standing charges for anyone with 
a prepayment meter 
● Push for an annual uplift of Local 
Housing Allowance, whilst ensuring rental 
costs are taken into account 
● Call for a combination of the Warm Home 
Discount and Energy Company Obligation 
to create a single, flexible fuel poverty 
scheme in Scotland - one that better 
reflects our definition of fuel poverty and 
supports our most vulnerable 
● Introduce a fair energy pricing and rebate 
scheme for Highland and Islands 
residents, offering financial relief and 
offsetting the higher per-unit costs of 
electricity those residents currently face 
● Reintroduce a simplified Help to Buy ISA 
scheme to help first time buyers 
But we believe that more fundamental change 
is needed to tackle the cost of living crisis and 
improve living standards for all. 

Shockingly, recent analysis showed this 
generation of young people is set to be the 
first in living memory to be worse off than their 
parents. That is not the future we want for our 
young people. 

With independence we can reverse Brexit and 
austerity which are making the cost of living 
more expensive and have been imposed upon 
us against our will. 

Our vision is of an independent Scotland, where 
decisions are made in Scotland, for Scotland, 
and where we can match, and indeed exceed, 
the economic success and living standards of 
neighbouring European countries. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 15 

<pb/>
DEFENDING 
SCOTLAND'S 
PARLIAMENT 
AND YOUR 
RIGHTS 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

Scotland is a proud, democratic nation. From 
the independence referendum with record high 
levels of engagement, to introducing a fairer 
electoral system and extending the right to 
vote, we have taken important steps to advance 
democracy and human rights. 

In stark contrast, Westminster has launched 
repeated attacks on our democracy, 
undermining the Scottish Parliament, something 
the people of Scotland voted overwhelmingly 
for, with something they voted overwhelmingly 
against - Brexit. 

There is a long-standing convention that 
Westminster should not pass laws in devolved 
areas without the consent of Holyrood. But, 
since Brexit, we have seen a complete disregard 
for Scotland's democratic institutions, resulting 
in 12 occasions where the views of the Scottish 
Parliament have been overridden. 

And they have gone further. The UK Internal 
Market Act reduces the powers of the Scottish 
Parliament and allows the UK Government to 
override our democracy at a stroke. 

And, the Tories have taken the unprecedented 
step of blocking legislation passed by Scotland's 
Parliament - on a cross party basis - setting 
a dangerous, anti-democratic precedent. 

Now the UK is even threatening to prevent 
Scotland from promoting our country, our culture 
and inward investment into our economy to 
countries overseas. 

Scotland deserves so much better. 

The SNP Scottish Government has a clear 
mandate to offer the people of Scotland a 
choice over our future, the choice to become 
a fairer, democratic, independent nation. 

And given the state of the broken Westminster 
system, it is critical that the next UK 
Government respects that mandate. 

The SNP is the only party who will protect 
Scotland's parliament, democracy and crucially 
give people the right to decide their own future. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 17 

<pb/>
PUTTING 
SCOTLAND'S 
INTERESTS FIRST 

PROTECTING SCOTLAND'S NHS 

Our NHS is our most cherished public service. 
Under the SNP, funding for Scotland's NHS has 
more than doubled and NHS staffing is at a 
record high - with far more doctors and nurses 
per head in Scotland than south of the border. 

When it comes to investment and improvement 
in our NHS, we're determined to go further - 
including investing &pound;300m to drive down waiting 
times - but we are doing that with one hand tied 
behind our back by Westminster. 

SNP MPs will demand that the UK Government: 

Protect the NHS from Westminster 
privatisation through our 'Keep the NHS in 
Public Hands' Bill. Further privatisation must 
be ruled out and the new UK Government should 
commit to back our Bill, ensuring the health 
service is fully protected as a publicly owned 
and operated service. The Bill will stop any UK 
government undermining the principles and 
protections of the NHS as part of any future 
trade deals. 

Boost NHS spending by a minimum of 
&pound;10bn extra each year to address rampant 
inflationary pressures and improve 
performance. This investment into NHS England 
would generate an additional &pound;1bn annually for 
NHS Scotland to help meet increasing demand. 

Match Scotland's NHS pay deals by increasing 
investment in NHS England staff pay and 
conditions of at least &pound;6bn. This would deliver 
around &pound;600m for Scotland that we could 
invest in pay deals for our hardworking NHS 
staff. Combined with our calls for additional 
investment to improve performance, this &pound;16bn 
funding boost would generate &pound;1.6bn annually 
for Scotland's NHS. 

Standing up for our workforce. SNP MPs 
will call for the reversal of recent moves by 
the Tories to stop care workers from overseas 
bringing their families with them to work in 
the UK. Without these vital workers coming to 
care for our loved ones, we will see shortages 
increase further and the most vulnerable in our 
society suffer. 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

BUILDING A FAIRER, GREENER ECONOMY 

A green energy powerhouse 

Scotland is an energy-rich nation but without the full powers of independence we 
cannot fully harness the opportunities our vast renewable energy sources provide. 

We will demand the devolution of powers over energy regulation, pricing and 
production to ensure that our natural energy resources are used to best serve 
the needs of the Scottish people. 

Scotland has won the energy lottery not once but twice - but instead of 
benefiting Scotland's interests, our energy resources have bankrolled successive 
UK Governments. Scotland as a whole should see far more of that benefit, but 
we also believe the local communities who house the infrastructure - like pylons 
and wind farms - should get a much greater degree of benefit. 

Devolution allows us very few mechanisms via the planning system to deliver 
increases in community benefit. Therefore, it is vital the UK Government devolves 
the powers to us, so that wherever there is a significant investment, we can 
ensure our communities feel the benefit. 

With full powers, we could make changes to the electricity grid system that 
currently holds back the development of renewable energy in Scotland, including 
reducing fees for Scottish producers to connect. 

Until we have those powers, it is crucial that the UK Government steps up. 

The UK Government must invest at least &pound;28bn a year in the green economy 
to deliver a step change in public and private investment in net zero and major 
investment in the domestic supply chain. As part of this investment, the UK 
Government should seek an equity stake in future energy projects. The return 
on this investment for the taxpayer will be used to directly benefit the Scottish 
people by protecting jobs, growing the green economy and lowering energy bills. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 19 

<pb/>
BUILDING A FAIRER, GREENER ECONOMY 

Under the SNP, Scotland's economy is already 
one of the best performing parts of the UK with 
both GDP per head and productivity growing 
faster in Scotland than the UK as a whole. 
But we want to go further. 

Our commitment to tackling the twin crises of 
climate change and nature loss is unwavering 
and we believe emissions reduction and 
economic prosperity go hand in hand. We want 
to share in the enormous economic opportunities 
of the global transition to net zero. 

SNP MPs will demand the UK Government: 

Bring forward an immediate emergency budget 

following the election to reverse cuts to public 
spending and deliver meaningful investment in 
economic growth, including green energy. 

Work at pace with the Acorn Project and 
Scottish Cluster to secure the fastest possible 
deployment following the UK Government's 
failure to support the Acorn carbon capture, 
utilisation and storage project at track 1. Urgent 
clarity is required to restore investor confidence, 
boost economic opportunities and make progress 
against our net zero obligations. 

Modernise the Contracts for Difference 
scheme to enable the stable deployment 
of Scotland's renewable energy pipeline. 

Take an evidence-based approach to oil and 
gas. The UK Government is the decision-maker 
on new oil and gas licences. We believe any 
further extraction must be consistent with 
our climate obligations and take due account 
of energy security considerations. Decisions 
must be made on a rigorously evidence-led, 
case-by-case basis, through a robust climate 
compatibility assessment. 

Support the North East and the Just Transition. 

North Sea oil and gas is naturally declining, 
and as the transition to new industries gathers 
pace, we are clear that the workers, families 
and people of that industry and the North East 
must not be abandoned. We are supporting 
them with the &pound;500 million North-East Transition 
Fund - a fund the UK Government must now 
at least match. 

Deliver a sustainable future for Grangemouth. 

The future of the Grangemouth complex must be 
secured and a just transition delivered for the 
workforce. The UK Government must recognise 
the importance of the whole site to Scotland's 
economy and communities and must invest in 
a sustainable future. Time is needed to unlock 
the significant opportunities for green industries 
of the future and it is important that the skilled 
workforce is retained, by extending refining for as 
long as possible, while that happens. Only in this 
way, can as many jobs as possible be protected 
and the transition made to working on the new, 
greener technologies that offer a long-term future 
for the site.. 

Rule out new nuclear power plants in 
Scotland. The SNP believe the best pathway to 
net zero and secure, affordable and clean energy 
is through significant growth in renewables, 
storage, hydrogen and carbon capture. 

Promote Scotland's hydrogen export potential. 

Scotland is well placed to supply significant 
amounts of hydrogen to continental Europe. 
SNP MPs will press for the UK Government to 
secure progress with direct interconnection 
between Scotland and the continent, and 
regulatory agreement to unlock Scotland's 
renewable potential. 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

Ban new coal licences. Follow the SNP Scottish 
Government's lead and commit to no support for 
new coal mines, which would undermine 
our action to reach net zero. 

Provide fair funding for climate. Scotland 
has over two thirds of the UK's peatland, and 
currently plants over 60% of trees in the UK, 
yet funds restoration and planting within our 
budget, with no help from the UK Government. 
Westminster must ensure fair funding flows to 
devolved nations to enable our, and their, climate 
ambition given that for the whole of the UK to 
reach net zero by 2050, Scotland must do so 
by 2045. 

Establish a Four Nations Climate Response 
Group to agree climate plans across the UK 
that deliver on our net-zero targets and ensure 
the UK Government stops backtracking on 
climate ambition. 

Devolve powers to create a bespoke migration 
system for Scotland that values those who 
decide to work, live, study and invest here and 
allows us to address our specific demographic 
and economic needs. 

Introduce a rural visa pilot scheme. Scotland 
should have full powers over immigration, 
including the devolution of overseas workers' 
employment visas. Until then, it is vital the 
UK Government acknowledges the distinct 
demographic challenges we face in Scotland 
and introduce a pilot to mitigate against labour 
shortages as a result of a hard Brexit and hostile 
immigration policies. 

Mitigate the harm of Brexit on productivity 

by reviewing immigration rules and expanding 
shortage occupation lists, so businesses have 
access to the workforce they need. 

Provide sustainable funding for farming. 

Despite numerous requests, Scotland has had 
no commitment from Westminster on any future 
funding for farming after 2025. The UK 
Government must increase funding for farming 

- to at least pre-Brexit levels - and provide certainty 
through multi-annual funding frameworks. 
Agree a veterinary agreement with the EU to 
ease exports and imports. 

Give Scotland our rightful share of marine 
funding. Scotland has 63% of UK fishing waters 
and over 90% of aquaculture production but, 
since Brexit, Westminster has shortchanged 
funding for innovation and investment - 
allocating only &pound;14m directly, instead of the 
&pound;62m we were entitled to. The UK Government 
must give Scotland our rightful share of marine 
funding - and provide certainty through multi-
annual funding frameworks. 

Prioritise Scotland's unique fishing needs. 

The Tories' post-Brexit trade agreement with 
the EU has created a &pound;281 million shortfall in 
quota value and threatens a key export market 
for Scottish salmon after 2026. Only with 
independence will we get the change Scotland's 
seafood sector really needs. Until then, to 
protect our interests, we will press for real and 
meaningful engagement for Scotland through 
the upcoming review of the trade agreement 
and continue to call for our fair share of quota 
through a shift to zonal attachment. 

Prioritise research and investment in Artificial 
Intelligence to capitalise on the technological 
revolution and ensure its full potential is 
maximised in supporting our public services in 
a way that is open, ethical and transparent. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 21 

<pb/>
A CLEANER, GREENER TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

Under the SNP huge improvements have 
been made to our transport system. We've 
scrapped bridge tolls, invested over &pound;11bn on 
rail infrastructure, brought Scotland's railway 
into public hands and removed peak fares, 
provided free bus travel to 2.2 million people and 
completed the Queensferry crossing on time and 
under budget. But our ambition is constrained by 
resources and powers controlled by Westminster. 

SNP MPs will call for the UK Government to: 

Transfer full powers for complete integration 
of track and train to Scotland - a fully devolved 
railway, including full ownership and powers 
over Network Rail Scotland and with powers for 
permanent public ownership of rail services to 
best serve Scotland's passengers, communities 
and economy. 

Promote a fair and affordable transition to 
zero-emission transport fuels and ban the 
import and sale of new, non zero-emission buses 
by 2025. The UK Government must also fully 
support the production and use of sustainable 
bridging fuels in the maritime and aviation 
sectors. 

Strengthen incentives to purchase cleaner 
vehicles. Following the example of France, the 
UK Government should establish a new Low 
Income EV Car Leasing Fund, backed up by at 
least &pound;500m, to enable 50,000 EV leases a year 
to benefit low income families. 

Invest in safer roads. Reducing road traffic 
is key to cutting emissions, but in a rural and 
sparsely populated country, not everywhere and 
everyone can be expected to make the same 
changes at the same time. It is vital that we 
ensure roads are as safe, reliable and resilient 

as possible. We are committed to dualling the 
A9 in full between Perth and Inverness and 
improving the A96, including dualling Inverness 
to Nairn and the Nairn Bypass. We will press the 
UK Government to fulfil their commitment to fund 
improvements to the A75. 

BROADCASTING 

Broadcasting is a crucial platform to showcase 
Scottish life and culture, but with power over 
broadcasting reserved to Westminster we are 
restricted in our ability to ensure it better reflects 
the needs and priorities of Scottish audiences. 

SNP MPs will call for the UK Government to: 

Devolve broadcasting powers to enable 
broadcasters who have a public service remit to 
better meet the interests of Scottish audiences. 

Support increased investment in Scottish 
broadcasting. Until devolved, we will continue 
to push all public service broadcasters to invest 
a far fairer share of spending on production 
in Scotland. 

Give Gaelic broadcasting a statutory parity of 
esteem with Welsh language broadcasting. 

The UK Government must rectify the disparity 
between Gaelic and Welsh language caused by 
the recent Media Bill and ensure proportional 
funding for BBC Alba. 

Include major Scottish national team matches 
on the list of sporting events for free-to-air 
channels, ensuring no financial detriment to the 
game while guaranteeing parity of access for all. 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

STANDING UP FOR WORKERS 

Years of attacks on workers' rights have shown 
that Westminster is not working for workers. With 
independence we can guarantee the rights of 
working people in Scotland are protected and 
strengthened. Until then, it is vital Scotland has 
strong SNP voices at Westminster to stand up 
for workers. SNP MPs will demand that the 
UK Government: 

Devolve employment rights and the minimum 
wage so that we can scrap exploitative zero 
hours contracts, ban 'fire and rehire' practices 
and take action to close the gender pay gap. We 
would increase the minimum wage to at least the 
level of the national living wage and increase in 
line with inflation, and end age discrimination of 
pay levels. 

Amend the definition of worker to strengthen 
protections for those with unfair contracts by 
creating a single status of "worker" for all but 
the genuinely self-employed. 

CREATING A JUST 
AND HEALTHIER SCOTLAND 

While Westminster governments prioritise 
tax cuts for the wealthy, the SNP Scottish 
Government is focussed on mitigating the cruel 
policies inflicted on the poorest in our society - 
investing around &pound;3bn a year in helping tackle 
poverty and the impacts of the Westminster 
made cost of living crisis. 

Within our devolved powers, we are delivering 
14 benefits - 7 of them brand new and only 
available in Scotland. Our game changing 
Scottish Child Payment now sits at &pound;26.70 per 

Scrap the sick pay threshold to ensure lower 
paid workers have access to statutory sick pay 
and scrap the four day waiting period to allow 
those who need financial support through illness 
to access it sooner. 

Increase paid maternity leave to one year, with 
maternity pay set at 100% of average weekly 
earnings for the first 12 weeks, then 90% for 40 
weeks or &pound;185.00, whichever is lower. The UK 
Government should increase shared parental 
leave from 52 to 64 weeks, with the additional 
12 weeks to be the minimum taken by the 
father on a 'use it or lose it' basis, in order to 
encourage an increase in shared parental leave. 

Protect the right to strike. SNP MPs will 
demand the next UK Government stand with 
workers and repeal the Strikes (Minimum 
Services Levels) Act. Instead, they should 
learn from the recent success of the Scottish 
Government and resolve industrial disputes 
through constructive negotiations. SNP MPs 
have long called for the repeal of the Trade Union 
Act 2016, and we will continue to press the UK 
Government to do so without delay. 

child a week and is lifting thousands of children 
out of poverty. The UK Government should 
take complimentary action to help the Scottish 
Government fulfil its mission to eradicate 
child poverty. 

While we do all we can to lift people out of 
poverty, it is clear that Westminster control holds 
us back. With the powers of independence, 
Scotland could unleash its full potential and build 
a better, fairer society. We will continue to call for 
the full devolution of social security powers so 
that we can put those foundations in place. Until 
then, SNP MPs will call for the UK Government to: 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 23 

<pb/>
Scrap the two child benefit cap and associated 
rape clause which has driven thousands of 
families into poverty and forced women to relive 
the trauma of rape in order to claim the support 
they, and their children, need to live. Unlike 
Labour and the Tories, we stand firmly against 
this abhorrent policy and will continue to call for 
its abolition. 

End the young parent penalty in Universal 
Credit which sees under-25s receiving 
considerably less. 

Scrap proposed punitive welfare reforms for 
sick and disabled people which will take support 
away from some of the most vulnerable people 
in our communities, and halt DWP repayment 
demands on Carer's Allowance. 

Protect pensions by maintaining the triple lock 
and move to deliver a wellbeing pension. We will 
oppose any acceleration of planned changes or 
further increases in the state pension age. 

Stand up for WASPI women by pressing the 
UK Government to deliver full, fast and fair 
compensation for women who have been 
wronged by pension inequality. 

Reverse the cut to Pension Credit that means 
older couples in Scotland could be &pound;7,000 worse 
off per year. 

Maximise Pension Credit uptake by following 
Scotland's lead and introducing a comprehensive 
benefit take-up strategy for all benefits. 

Provide full restitution for the victims of the 
Equitable Life scandal. It is time for the UK 
Government to end the delay and provide urgent 
funding to compensate in full those who saved 
diligently for retirement in good faith yet suffered 
serious losses through no fault of their own. 

Scrap the cruel bedroom tax which punishes 
people claiming Universal Credit or housing 
benefit if they have a spare room in their rented 
council or housing association home. 

Devolve Housing Benefit and Local Housing 
Allowance which will allow the Scottish 
Government to take an innovative approach 
to tackle child poverty, expand the delivery of 
social housing and to help fund and encourage 
investment in house building. 

Tackle the housing emergency caused by 
decades of Westminster underinvestment, a 
hard Brexit and a &pound;1.3bn cut to the Scottish 
Government's capital budget from the UK 
Government. The UK Government must restore 
the cut to our Capital Budget. 

Protect the right to abortion. We are clear 
that all women should have access to abortion 
services in a timely and safe manner. The UK 
Government should follow Scotland's lead in 
reviewing the law on abortion to ensure that 
abortion is first and foremost treated as a 
healthcare matter. 

Provide justice for Infected Blood victims. We 
believe that compensation for victims of infected 
blood is long overdue and will work with the UK 
Government to ensure any compensation scheme 
works effectively for everyone who is infected or 
affected and is delivered without delay. 

Take a public health approach to tackle the 
drug deaths crisis, devolving powers to the 
Scottish Parliament so we can go further to 
reduce harm and improve lives in Scotland. We 
would decriminalise drugs for personal use and 
introduce a framework to allow Supervised Drug 
Consumption Facilities. 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

Reintroduce UK-wide legislation to create 
a smoke free generation and recommit to 
following the SNP Scottish Government's lead 
by banning single-use vapes. 

Treat problem gambling as a public health 
matter and take action to tackle the impacts 
of advertising. We believe a Gambling Levy is 
long overdue and the UK Government must 
act urgently to bring forward a levy without 
further delay. 

Introduce a RAAC Remediation Fund to ensure 
new capital money is made available to allow us 
to take any action that may be required to tackle 
the problem of ageing Reinforced Autoclaved 
Aerated Concrete in our public sector. 

Deliver justice for Post Office Horizon 
victims. It is vital that the UK Government pay 
compensation at pace to all sub postmasters 
who have suffered horrendous miscarriages 
of justice due to the failings of the Post Office 
Horizon IT system. The vast majority of payments 
should be made by the end of 2024. 

Refund the &pound;175m in VAT owed to Scotland's 
emergency services so we can invest it in our 
vital emergency services. 

Introduce 'Martyn's Law' without delay to 
ensure venues and councils have preventative 
plans in place against terror attacks. 

Protect people, particularly children, by 
ensuring the Online Safety Act comes into 
force on time. SNP MPs will press the UK 
Government to ensure tech firms cannot escape 
their responsibilities for the content on their 
platforms through full enforcement of the 
Act and prompt strengthening of these laws 
when required. 

Introduce a right to consular assistance 

for British nationals including those who are 
stranded, imprisoned or who die overseas and 
to implement in full the recommendations of the 
2019 All Party Parliamentary Group report on 
deaths abroad. 

DEFENDING DEMOCRACY 
AND HUMAN RIGHTS 

The SNP stands on a strong record of defending 
Scotland's democratic functions and institutions, 
and we will always stand up to promote and 
protect Scotland's democracy and make sure 
that the people of Scotland's voices are heard. 
SNP MPs will demand the UK Government: 

Give the people of Scotland a say on their 
future. Demand the permanent transfer of legal 
power to the Scottish Parliament to determine 
how Scotland is governed, including the 
transfer of power to enable it to legislate for 
a referendum. 

End Westminster's power grab by demanding 
the UK government repeal the reprehensible 
Internal Market Act. We are clear that UK 
ministers must not be able to act unilaterally 
across policy areas that are within devolved 
competencies, and will push for the Sewel 
Convention to be put on a proper statutory footing. 

Support abolition of the undemocratic House 
of Lords. 

Reform the voting system by replacing the 
first past the post system with the Single 
Transferable Vote. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 25 

<pb/>
Increase access to democracy by extending the 
voting age to 16, and eligibility to all residents, 
including all international students and those 
with refugee status, as is the case in Scotland. 

Scrap Voter ID. SNP MPs will continue to call on 
the UK Government to repeal the legislation and 
seek to rebuild trust in our democratic processes 
with voters. We will push for the introduction 
of automatic voter registration so that no-one 
needlessly misses out on their democratic 
right to vote. 

Respect international law and protect rights. 
Rather than rolling back on rights, we should be 
seeking to strengthen human rights protections 
for all. We will call on the UK Government to 
respect international law and strongly oppose any 
attempts by the UK government to withdraw the 
UK from the ECHR or change the Human Rights 
Act which is integral to the devolution settlement 
for the Scottish Parliament. 

Protect and enhance the rights of LGBTI 
community. The SNP has a proud record of 
advancing and championing LGBTI rights in 
government, and we will continue to build 
on this, working with LGBTI communities, to 
make Scotland a fairer and more equal place 
to live. With independence we would have 
the full powers to improve equality in law and 
society, and the ability to champion LGBTI 
equality internationally. 

Strengthen children's rights by demanding the 
UK Government follows Scotland's approach and 
incorporates the UN Convention on the Rights of 
the Child into law, to take a maximalist approach 
to the protection of children's rights. 

Stand up for asylum seekers by scrapping 
the morally repugnant Rwanda scheme and 
continuing to strongly oppose no recourse to 
public funds. We will urge the UK Government 
to grant asylum seekers the right to work and 
fundamentally change their approach to housing 
asylum seekers, ensuring accommodation is 
safe, suitable and dignified. 

<pb/>
SNP General Election Manifesto 2024 

SCOTLAND'S PLACE IN THE WORLD 

We want to see an independent Scotland take its 
place in the international community; alongside 
the 193 other United Nations member states, 
able to join the European Union, with the powers 
necessary to protect our citizens and prosper 
in the global economy. We are determined 
that Scotland plays a positive and progressive 
role in international affairs through action 
and leadership. SNP MPs will call on the UK 
Government to: 

Demand an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, 
release of hostages and end arms sales to Israel. 
We will continue to call on the UK Government 
to follow the lead of Ireland, Norway and Spain 
by immediately recognising Palestine as a state. 
We believe that recognising Palestine as a state 
in its own right is the only way to move towards a 
just and durable long-term peace, in the interests 
of both Palestinians and Israelis. 

Stand by Ukraine and continue to strongly 
oppose the Russian invasion. We will continue 
to support Ukrainians who have settled in 
Scotland and will press the UK Government to 
extend visa rights whilst the conflict continues. 
We will do everything in our power 
to see the restoration of peace and ensure 
Ukraine's sovereignty, democracy, independence 
and territorial integrity is maintained. We will 
continue to back military support from the 
United Kingdom to Ukraine and will press the 
UK Government to ensure the sanctions regime 
against Russia is effective. 

Scrap Trident and invest the billions spent 
funding these immoral weapons in public 
services, like our NHS and schools and 
adequately funding conventional defence. 
The SNP has never and will never support the 
retention or renewal of Trident, and will press 
the UK government to meet their international 
obligations on nuclear disarmament. 

Connect Scotland's diaspora across 
the globe by working with national and 
international partners to implement the 
Scottish Connections Framework. 

Agree an EU-wide youth mobility scheme. 
Despite the EU proposing a post-Brexit mobility 
scheme for young people, both the Tories 
and Labour rejected it within hours. The UK 
Government must stop failing young people and 
agree a scheme so that young people can benefit 
from the opportunities that living, working and 
studying in the EU can bring. 

Immediately restore and maintain the UK 
international aid budget to 0.7%. 

Increase investment into loss and damage. 

Scotland was the first developed nation in the 
world to commit funding to address loss and 
damage, sparking debate and showing global 
leadership. Since then, the global loss and 
damage fund has reached $700 million. Instead 
of following Scotland's bold leadership, the 
UK Government opted to repurpose existing 
funding. The UK Government must provide a new 
contribution to the new Loss and Damage Fund 
which is truly additional to existing commitments. 

DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND. 27 

<pb/>
Strengthen Scotland's security by pushing 
the UK to focus on countering disinformation 
and misinformation, better protecting national 
critical infrastructure, improving supply chain 
resilience and strengthening the ability of the UK 
to rebound and rebuild from the aftermath of a 
shock or crisis. 

Raise the military recruitment age to 18. SNP 
MPs will urge the UK Government to phase out 
the recruitment of people under 18 in line with 
international standards. 

Prioritise the needs of our Armed Forces and 
Veterans community. We have long campaigned 
for an Armed Forces Representative Body 
to accommodate the wide range of needs, 
concerns, and identities within the Forces 
Community. We believe it is vital that the UK 
Government prioritise employment, social 
inclusion, health and wellbeing for veterans and 
their families. 

Support our veterans by following the approach 
of the SNP Scottish Government and ensure that 
the War Disablement Pension is exempt from the 
assessment of income for veterans who require 
social care services. 

<pb/>
Promoted by SNP 3 Jacksons Entry EH8 8PJ. Printed by Saltire 
60 Brook Street G40 2AB 

<pb/>
